Dorothy lived in the midst of the great Kansas prairies, with
Uncle Henry, who was a farmer, and Aunt Em, who was the farmer's
wife. Their house was small, for the lumber to build it had to be
carried by wagon many miles. There were four walls, a floor and a
roof, which made one room; and this room contained a rusty looking
cookstove, a cupboard for the dishes, a table, three or four
chairs, and the beds. Uncle Henry and Aunt Em had a big bed in one
corner, and Dorothy a little bed in another corner. There was no
garret at all, and no cellar—except a small hole dug in the ground,
called a cyclone cellar, where the family could go in case one of
those great whirlwinds arose, mighty enough to crush any building
in its path. It was reached by a trap door in the middle of the
floor, from which a ladder led down into the small, dark hole.
When Dorothy stood in the doorway and looked around, she could
see nothing but the great gray prairie on every side. Not a tree
nor a house broke the broad sweep of flat country that reached to
the edge of the sky in all directions. The sun had baked the plowed
land into a gray mass, with little cracks running through it. Even
the grass was not green, for the sun had burned the tops of the
long blades until they were the same gray color to be seen
everywhere. Once the house had been painted, but the sun blistered
the paint and the rains washed it away, and now the house was as
dull and gray as everything else.
When Aunt Em came there to live she was a young, pretty wife.
The sun and wind had changed her, too. They had taken the sparkle
from her eyes and left them a sober gray; they had taken the red
from her cheeks and lips, and they were gray also. She was thin and
gaunt, and never smiled now. When Dorothy, who was an orphan, first
came to her, Aunt Em had been so startled by the child's laughter
that she would scream and press her hand upon her heart whenever
Dorothy's merry voice reached her ears; and she still looked at theDorothy's merry voice reached her ears; and she still looked at the
little girl with wonder that she could find anything to laugh
at.
Uncle Henry never laughed. He worked hard from morning till
night and did not know what joy was. He was gray also, from his
long beard to his rough boots, and he looked stern and solemn, and
rarely spoke.
It was Toto that made Dorothy laugh, and saved her from growing
as gray as her other surroundings. Toto was not gray; he was a
little black dog, with long silky hair and small black eyes that
twinkled merrily on either side of his funny, wee nose. Toto played
all day long, and Dorothy played with him, and loved him
dearly.
Today, however, they were not playing. Uncle Henry sat upon the
doorstep and looked anxiously at the sky, which was even grayer
than usual. Dorothy stood in the door with Toto in her arms, and
looked at the sky too. Aunt Em was washing the dishes.
From the far north they heard a low wail of the wind, and Uncle
Henry and Dorothy could see where the long grass bowed in waves
before the coming storm. There now came a sharp whistling in the
air from the south, and as they turned their eyes that way they saw
ripples in the grass coming from that direction also.
Suddenly Uncle Henry stood up.
"There's a cyclone coming, Em," he called to his wife. "I'll go
look after the stock." Then he ran toward the sheds where the cows
and horses were kept.
Aunt Em dropped her work and came to the door. One glance told
her of the danger close at hand.
"Quick, Dorothy!" she screamed. "Run for the cellar!"
Toto jumped out of Dorothy's arms and hid under the bed, and the
girl started to get him. Aunt Em, badly frightened, threw open the
trap door in the floor and climbed down the ladder into the small,
dark hole. Dorothy caught Toto at last and started to follow her
aunt. When she was halfway across the room there came a great
shriek from the wind, and the house shook so hard that she lost her
footing and sat down suddenly upon the floor.
Then a strange thing happened.footing and sat down suddenly upon the floor.
Then a strange thing happened.
The house whirled around two or three times and rose slowly
through the air. Dorothy felt as if she were going up in a
balloon.
The north and south winds met where the house stood, and made it
the exact center of the cyclone. In the middle of a cyclone the air
is generally still, but the great pressure of the wind on every
side of the house raised it up higher and higher, until it was at
the very top of the cyclone; and there it remained and was carried
miles and miles away as easily as you could carry a feather.
It was very dark, and the wind howled horribly around her, but
Dorothy found she was riding quite easily. After the first few
whirls around, and one other time when the house tipped badly, she
felt as if she were being rocked gently, like a baby in a
cradle.
Toto did not like it. He ran about the room, now here, now
there, barking loudly; but Dorothy sat quite still on the floor and
waited to see what would happen.
Once Toto got too near the open trap door, and fell in; and at
first the little girl thought she had lost him. But soon she saw
one of his ears sticking up through the hole, for the strong
pressure of the air was keeping him up so that he could not fall.
She crept to the hole, caught Toto by the ear, and dragged him into
the room again, afterward closing the trap door so that no more
accidents could happen.
Hour after hour passed away, and slowly Dorothy got over her
fright; but she felt quite lonely, and the wind shrieked so loudly
all about her that she nearly became deaf. At first she had
wondered if she would be dashed to pieces when the house fell
again; but as the hours passed and nothing terrible happened, she
stopped worrying and resolved to wait calmly and see what the
future would bring. At last she crawled over the swaying floor to
her bed, and lay down upon it; and Toto followed and lay down
beside her.
In spite of the swaying of the house and the wailing of thebeside her.
In spite of the swaying of the house and the wailing of the
wind, Dorothy soon closed her eyes and fell fast asleep.",
    "She was awakened by a shock, so sudden and severe that if
Dorothy had not been lying on the soft bed she might have been
hurt. As it was, the jar made her catch her breath and wonder what
had happened; and Toto put his cold little nose into her face and
whined dismally. Dorothy sat up and noticed that the house was not
moving; nor was it dark, for the bright sunshine came in at the
window, flooding the little room. She sprang from her bed and with
Toto at her heels ran and opened the door.
The little girl gave a cry of amazement and looked about her,
her eyes growing bigger and bigger at the wonderful sights she
saw.
The cyclone had set the house down very gently—for a cyclone—in
the midst of a country of marvelous beauty. There were lovely
patches of greensward all about, with stately trees bearing rich
and luscious fruits. Banks of gorgeous flowers were on every hand,
and birds with rare and brilliant plumage sang and fluttered in the
trees and bushes. A little way off was a small brook, rushing and
sparkling along between green banks, and murmuring in a voice very
grateful to a little girl who had lived so long on the dry, gray
prairies.
While she stood looking eagerly at the strange and beautiful
sights, she noticed coming toward her a group of the queerest
people she had ever seen. They were not as big as the grown folk
she had always been used to; but neither were they very small. In
fact, they seemed about as tall as Dorothy, who was a well-grown
child for her age, although they were, so far as looks go, many
years older.
Three were men and one a woman, and all were oddly dressed. They
wore round hats that rose to a small point a foot above their
heads, with little bells around the brims that tinkled sweetly as
they moved. The hats of the men were blue; the little woman's hat
was white, and she wore a white gown that hung in pleats from her
shoulders. Over it were sprinkled little stars that glistened in
the sun like diamonds. The men were dressed in blue, of the samethe sun like diamonds. The men were dressed in blue, of the same
shade as their hats, and wore well-polished boots with a deep roll
of blue at the tops. The men, Dorothy thought, were about as old as
Uncle Henry, for two of them had beards. But the little woman was
doubtless much older. Her face was covered with wrinkles, her hair
was nearly white, and she walked rather stiffly.
When these people drew near the house where Dorothy was standing
in the doorway, they paused and whispered among themselves, as if
afraid to come farther. But the little old woman walked up to
Dorothy, made a low bow and said, in a sweet voice:
"You are welcome, most noble Sorceress, to the land of the
Munchkins. We are so grateful to you for having killed the Wicked
Witch of the East, and for setting our people free from
bondage."
Dorothy listened to this speech with wonder. What could the
little woman possibly mean by calling her a sorceress, and saying
she had killed the Wicked Witch of the East? Dorothy was an
innocent, harmless little girl, who had been carried by a cyclone
many miles from home; and she had never killed anything in all her
life.
But the little woman evidently expected her to answer; so
Dorothy said, with hesitation, "You are very kind, but there must
be some mistake. I have not killed anything."
"Your house did, anyway," replied the little old woman, with a
laugh, "and that is the same thing. See!" she continued, pointing
to the corner of the house. "There are her two feet, still sticking
out from under a block of wood."
Dorothy looked, and gave a little cry of fright. There, indeed,
just under the corner of the great beam the house rested on, two
feet were sticking out, shod in silver shoes with pointed toes.
"Oh, dear! Oh, dear!" cried Dorothy, clasping her hands together
in dismay. "The house must have fallen on her. Whatever shall we
do?"
"There is nothing to be done," said the little woman calmly.
"But who was she?" asked Dorothy.
"She was the Wicked Witch of the East, as I said," answered the"But who was she?" asked Dorothy.
"She was the Wicked Witch of the East, as I said," answered the
little woman. "She has held all the Munchkins in bondage for many
years, making them slave for her night and day. Now they are all
set free, and are grateful to you for the favor."
"Who are the Munchkins?" inquired Dorothy.
"They are the people who live in this land of the East where the
Wicked Witch ruled."
"Are you a Munchkin?" asked Dorothy.
"No, but I am their friend, although I live in the land of the
North. When they saw the Witch of the East was dead the Munchkins
sent a swift messenger to me, and I came at once. I am the Witch of
the North."
"Oh, gracious!" cried Dorothy. "Are you a real witch?"
"Yes, indeed," answered the little woman. "But I am a good
witch, and the people love me. I am not as powerful as the Wicked
Witch was who ruled here, or I should have set the people free
myself."
"But I thought all witches were wicked," said the girl, who was
half frightened at facing a real witch. "Oh, no, that is a great
mistake. There were only four witches in all the Land of Oz, and
two of them, those who live in the North and the South, are good
witches. I know this is true, for I am one of them myself, and
cannot be mistaken. Those who dwelt in the East and the West were,
indeed, wicked witches; but now that you have killed one of them,
there is but one Wicked Witch in all the Land of Oz—the one who
lives in the West."
"But," said Dorothy, after a moment's thought, "Aunt Em has told
me that the witches were all dead—years and years ago."
"Who is Aunt Em?" inquired the little old woman.
"She is my aunt who lives in Kansas, where I came from."
The Witch of the North seemed to think for a time, with her head
bowed and her eyes upon the ground. Then she looked up and said, "I
do not know where Kansas is, for I have never heard that country
mentioned before. But tell me, is it a civilized country?"
"Oh, yes," replied Dorothy.
"Then that accounts for it. In the civilized countries I believe",
    ""Oh, yes," replied Dorothy.
"Then that accounts for it. In the civilized countries I believe
there are no witches left, nor wizards, nor sorceresses, nor
magicians. But, you see, the Land of Oz has never been civilized,
for we are cut off from all the rest of the world. Therefore we
still have witches and wizards amongst us."
"Who are the wizards?" asked Dorothy.
"Oz himself is the Great Wizard," answered the Witch, sinking
her voice to a whisper. "He is more powerful than all the rest of
us together. He lives in the City of Emeralds."
Dorothy was going to ask another question, but just then the
Munchkins, who had been standing silently by, gave a loud shout and
pointed to the corner of the house where the Wicked Witch had been
lying.
"What is it?" asked the little old woman, and looked, and began
to laugh. The feet of the dead Witch had disappeared entirely, and
nothing was left but the silver shoes.
"She was so old," explained the Witch of the North, "that she
dried up quickly in the sun. That is the end of her. But the silver
shoes are yours, and you shall have them to wear." She reached down
and picked up the shoes, and after shaking the dust out of them
handed them to Dorothy.
"The Witch of the East was proud of those silver shoes," said
one of the Munchkins, "and there is some charm connected with them;
but what it is we never knew."
Dorothy carried the shoes into the house and placed them on the
table. Then she came out again to the Munchkins and said:
"I am anxious to get back to my aunt and uncle, for I am sure
they will worry about me. Can you help me find my way?"
The Munchkins and the Witch first looked at one another, and
then at Dorothy, and then shook their heads.
"At the East, not far from here," said one, "there is a great
desert, and none could live to cross it."
"It is the same at the South," said another, "for I have been
there and seen it. The South is the country of the Quadlings."
"I am told," said the third man, "that it is the same at the"I am told," said the third man, "that it is the same at the
West. And that country, where the Winkies live, is ruled by the
Wicked Witch of the West, who would make you her slave if you
passed her way."
"The North is my home," said the old lady, "and at its edge is
the same great desert that surrounds this Land of Oz. I'm afraid,
my dear, you will have to live with us."
Dorothy began to sob at this, for she felt lonely among all
these strange people. Her tears seemed to grieve the kind-hearted
Munchkins, for they immediately took out their handkerchiefs and
began to weep also. As for the little old woman, she took off her
cap and balanced the point on the end of her nose, while she
counted "One, two, three" in a solemn voice. At once the cap
changed to a slate, on which was written in big, white chalk
marks:
"LET DOROTHY GO TO THE CITY OF EMERALDS"
The little old woman took the slate from her nose, and having
read the words on it, asked, "Is your name Dorothy, my dear?"
"Yes," answered the child, looking up and drying her tears.
"Then you must go to the City of Emeralds. Perhaps Oz will help
you."
"Where is this city?" asked Dorothy.
"It is exactly in the center of the country, and is ruled by Oz,
the Great Wizard I told you of."
"Is he a good man?" inquired the girl anxiously.
"He is a good Wizard. Whether he is a man or not I cannot tell,
for I have never seen him."
"How can I get there?" asked Dorothy.
"You must walk. It is a long journey, through a country that is
sometimes pleasant and sometimes dark and terrible. However, I will
use all the magic arts I know of to keep you from harm."
"Won't you go with me?" pleaded the girl, who had begun to look
upon the little old woman as her only friend.
"No, I cannot do that," she replied, "but I will give you my
kiss, and no one will dare injure a person who has been kissed by
the Witch of the North."
She came close to Dorothy and kissed her gently on the forehead.
Where her lips touched the girl they left a round, shining mark, as
Dorothy found out soon after.Where her lips touched the girl they left a round, shining mark, as
Dorothy found out soon after.
"The road to the City of Emeralds is paved with yellow brick,"
said the Witch, "so you cannot miss it. When you get to Oz do not
be afraid of him, but tell your story and ask him to help you.
Good-bye, my dear."
The three Munchkins bowed low to her and wished her a pleasant
journey, after which they walked away through the trees. The Witch
gave Dorothy a friendly little nod, whirled around on her left heel
three times, and straightway disappeared, much to the surprise of
little Toto, who barked after her loudly enough when she had gone,
because he had been afraid even to growl while she stood by.
But Dorothy, knowing her to be a witch, had expected her to
disappear in just that way, and was not surprised in the least.When Dorothy was left alone she began to feel hungry. So she
went to the cupboard and cut herself some bread, which she spread
with butter. She gave some to Toto, and taking a pail from the
shelf she carried it down to the little brook and filled it with
clear, sparkling water. Toto ran over to the trees and began to
bark at the birds sitting there. Dorothy went to get him, and saw
such delicious fruit hanging from the branches that she gathered
some of it, finding it just what she wanted to help out her
breakfast.
Then she went back to the house, and having helped herself and
Toto to a good drink of the cool, clear water, she set about making
ready for the journey to the City of Emeralds.
Dorothy had only one other dress, but that happened to be clean
and was hanging on a peg beside her bed. It was gingham, with
checks of white and blue; and although the blue was somewhat faded
with many washings, it was still a pretty frock. The girl washed
herself carefully, dressed herself in the clean gingham, and tied
her pink sunbonnet on her head. She took a little basket and filled
it with bread from the cupboard, laying a white cloth over the top.
Then she looked down at her feet and noticed how old and worn her
shoes were.
"They surely will never do for a long journey, Toto," she said.
And Toto looked up into her face with his little black eyes and
wagged his tail to show he knew what she meant.
At that moment Dorothy saw lying on the table the silver shoes
that had belonged to the Witch of the East.
"I wonder if they will fit me," she said to Toto. "They would be
just the thing to take a long walk in, for they could not wear
out."
She took off her old leather shoes and tried on the silver ones,
which fitted her as well as if they had been made for her.
Finally she picked up her basket.
"Come along, Toto," she said. "We will go to the Emerald City
and ask the Great Oz how to get back to Kansas again."
She closed the door, locked it, and put the key carefully in the",
    "She closed the door, locked it, and put the key carefully in the
pocket of her dress. And so, with Toto trotting along soberly
behind her, she started on her journey.
There were several roads near by, but it did not take her long
to find the one paved with yellow bricks. Within a short time she
was walking briskly toward the Emerald City, her silver shoes
tinkling merrily on the hard, yellow road-bed. The sun shone bright
and the birds sang sweetly, and Dorothy did not feel nearly so bad
as you might think a little girl would who had been suddenly
whisked away from her own country and set down in the midst of a
strange land.
She was surprised, as she walked along, to see how pretty the
country was about her. There were neat fences at the sides of the
road, painted a dainty blue color, and beyond them were fields of
grain and vegetables in abundance. Evidently the Munchkins were
good farmers and able to raise large crops. Once in a while she
would pass a house, and the people came out to look at her and bow
low as she went by; for everyone knew she had been the means of
destroying the Wicked Witch and setting them free from bondage. The
houses of the Munchkins were odd-looking dwellings, for each was
round, with a big dome for a roof. All were painted blue, for in
this country of the East blue was the favorite color.
Toward evening, when Dorothy was tired with her long walk and
began to wonder where she should pass the night, she came to a
house rather larger than the rest. On the green lawn before it many
men and women were dancing. Five little fiddlers played as loudly
as possible, and the people were laughing and singing, while a big
table near by was loaded with delicious fruits and nuts, pies and
cakes, and many other good things to eat.
The people greeted Dorothy kindly, and invited her to supper and
to pass the night with them; for this was the home of one of the
richest Munchkins in the land, and his friends were gathered with
him to celebrate their freedom from the bondage of the Wicked
Witch.him to celebrate their freedom from the bondage of the Wicked
Witch.
Dorothy ate a hearty supper and was waited upon by the rich
Munchkin himself, whose name was Boq. Then she sat upon a settee
and watched the people dance.
When Boq saw her silver shoes he said, "You must be a great
sorceress."
"Why?" asked the girl.
"Because you wear silver shoes and have killed the Wicked Witch.
Besides, you have white in your frock, and only witches and
sorceresses wear white."
"My dress is blue and white checked," said Dorothy, smoothing
out the wrinkles in it.
"It is kind of you to wear that," said Boq. "Blue is the color
of the Munchkins, and white is the witch color. So we know you are
a friendly witch."
Dorothy did not know what to say to this, for all the people
seemed to think her a witch, and she knew very well she was only an
ordinary little girl who had come by the chance of a cyclone into a
strange land.
When she had tired watching the dancing, Boq led her into the
house, where he gave her a room with a pretty bed in it. The sheets
were made of blue cloth, and Dorothy slept soundly in them till
morning, with Toto curled up on the blue rug beside her.
She ate a hearty breakfast, and watched a wee Munchkin baby, who
played with Toto and pulled his tail and crowed and laughed in a
way that greatly amused Dorothy. Toto was a fine curiosity to all
the people, for they had never seen a dog before.
"How far is it to the Emerald City?" the girl asked.
"I do not know," answered Boq gravely, "for I have never been
there. It is better for people to keep away from Oz, unless they
have business with him. But it is a long way to the Emerald City,
and it will take you many days. The country here is rich and
pleasant, but you must pass through rough and dangerous places
before you reach the end of your journey."
This worried Dorothy a little, but she knew that only the Great
Oz could help her get to Kansas again, so she bravely resolved not
to turn back.
She bade her friends good-bye, and again started along the roadto turn back.
She bade her friends good-bye, and again started along the road
of yellow brick. When she had gone several miles she thought she
would stop to rest, and so climbed to the top of the fence beside
the road and sat down. There was a great cornfield beyond the
fence, and not far away she saw a Scarecrow, placed high on a pole
to keep the birds from the ripe corn.
Dorothy leaned her chin upon her hand and gazed thoughtfully at
the Scarecrow. Its head was a small sack stuffed with straw, with
eyes, nose, and mouth painted on it to represent a face. An old,
pointed blue hat, that had belonged to some Munchkin, was perched
on his head, and the rest of the figure was a blue suit of clothes,
worn and faded, which had also been stuffed with straw. On the feet
were some old boots with blue tops, such as every man wore in this
country, and the figure was raised above the stalks of corn by
means of the pole stuck up its back.
While Dorothy was looking earnestly into the queer, painted face
of the Scarecrow, she was surprised to see one of the eyes slowly
wink at her. She thought she must have been mistaken at first, for
none of the scarecrows in Kansas ever wink; but presently the
figure nodded its head to her in a friendly way. Then she climbed
down from the fence and walked up to it, while Toto ran around the
pole and barked.
"Good day," said the Scarecrow, in a rather husky voice.
"Did you speak?" asked the girl, in wonder.
"Certainly," answered the Scarecrow. "How do you do?"
"I'm pretty well, thank you," replied Dorothy politely. "How do
you do?"
"I'm not feeling well," said the Scarecrow, with a smile, "for
it is very tedious being perched up here night and day to scare
away crows."
"Can't you get down?" asked Dorothy.
"No, for this pole is stuck up my back. If you will please take
away the pole I shall be greatly obliged to you."
Dorothy reached up both arms and lifted the figure off the pole,
for, being stuffed with straw, it was quite light.",
    "for, being stuffed with straw, it was quite light.
"Thank you very much," said the Scarecrow, when he had been set
down on the ground. "I feel like a new man."
Dorothy was puzzled at this, for it sounded queer to hear a
stuffed man speak, and to see him bow and walk along beside
her.
"Who are you?" asked the Scarecrow when he had stretched himself
and yawned. "And where are you going?"
"My name is Dorothy," said the girl, "and I am going to the
Emerald City, to ask the Great Oz to send me back to Kansas."
"Where is the Emerald City?" he inquired. "And who is Oz?"
"Why, don't you know?" she returned, in surprise.
"No, indeed. I don't know anything. You see, I am stuffed, so I
have no brains at all," he answered sadly.
"Oh," said Dorothy, "I'm awfully sorry for you."
"Do you think," he asked, "if I go to the Emerald City with you,
that Oz would give me some brains?"
"I cannot tell," she returned, "but you may come with me, if you
like. If Oz will not give you any brains you will be no worse off
than you are now."
"That is true," said the Scarecrow. "You see," he continued
confidentially, "I don't mind my legs and arms and body being
stuffed, because I cannot get hurt. If anyone treads on my toes or
sticks a pin into me, it doesn't matter, for I can't feel it. But I
do not want people to call me a fool, and if my head stays stuffed
with straw instead of with brains, as yours is, how am I ever to
know anything?"
"I understand how you feel," said the little girl, who was truly
sorry for him. "If you will come with me I'll ask Oz to do all he
can for you."
"Thank you," he answered gratefully.
They walked back to the road. Dorothy helped him over the fence,
and they started along the path of yellow brick for the Emerald
City.
Toto did not like this addition to the party at first. He
smelled around the stuffed man as if he suspected there might be a
nest of rats in the straw, and he often growled in an unfriendly
way at the Scarecrow.
"Don't mind Toto," said Dorothy to her new friend. "He never
bites."way at the Scarecrow.
"Don't mind Toto," said Dorothy to her new friend. "He never
bites."
"Oh, I'm not afraid," replied the Scarecrow. "He can't hurt the
straw. Do let me carry that basket for you. I shall not mind it,
for I can't get tired. I'll tell you a secret," he continued, as he
walked along. "There is only one thing in the world I am afraid
of."
"What is that?" asked Dorothy; "the Munchkin farmer who made
you?"
"No," answered the Scarecrow; "it's a lighted match."After a few hours the road began to be rough, and the walking
grew so difficult that the Scarecrow often stumbled over the yellow
bricks, which were here very uneven. Sometimes, indeed, they were
broken or missing altogether, leaving holes that Toto jumped across
and Dorothy walked around. As for the Scarecrow, having no brains,
he walked straight ahead, and so stepped into the holes and fell at
full length on the hard bricks. It never hurt him, however, and
Dorothy would pick him up and set him upon his feet again, while he
joined her in laughing merrily at his own mishap.
The farms were not nearly so well cared for here as they were
farther back. There were fewer houses and fewer fruit trees, and
the farther they went the more dismal and lonesome the country
became.
At noon they sat down by the roadside, near a little brook, and
Dorothy opened her basket and got out some bread. She offered a
piece to the Scarecrow, but he refused.
"I am never hungry," he said, "and it is a lucky thing I am not,
for my mouth is only painted, and if I should cut a hole in it so I
could eat, the straw I am stuffed with would come out, and that
would spoil the shape of my head."
Dorothy saw at once that this was true, so she only nodded and
went on eating her bread.
"Tell me something about yourself and the country you came
from," said the Scarecrow, when she had finished her dinner. So she
told him all about Kansas, and how gray everything was there, and
how the cyclone had carried her to this queer Land of Oz.
The Scarecrow listened carefully, and said, "I cannot understand
why you should wish to leave this beautiful country and go back to
the dry, gray place you call Kansas."
"That is because you have no brains" answered the girl. "No
matter how dreary and gray our homes are, we people of flesh and
blood would rather live there than in any other country, be it ever
so beautiful. There is no place like home."
The Scarecrow sighed.
"Of course I cannot understand it," he said. "If your heads wereThe Scarecrow sighed.
"Of course I cannot understand it," he said. "If your heads were
stuffed with straw, like mine, you would probably all live in the
beautiful places, and then Kansas would have no people at all. It
is fortunate for Kansas that you have brains."
"Won't you tell me a story, while we are resting?" asked the
child.
The Scarecrow looked at her reproachfully, and answered:
"My life has been so short that I really know nothing whatever.
I was only made day before yesterday. What happened in the world
before that time is all unknown to me. Luckily, when the farmer
made my head, one of the first things he did was to paint my ears,
so that I heard what was going on. There was another Munchkin with
him, and the first thing I heard was the farmer saying, `How do you
like those ears?'
"`They aren't straight,'" answered the other.
"`Never mind,'" said the farmer. "`They are ears just the
same,'" which was true enough.
"`Now I'll make the eyes,'" said the farmer. So he painted my
right eye, and as soon as it was finished I found myself looking at
him and at everything around me with a great deal of curiosity, for
this was my first glimpse of the world.
"`That's a rather pretty eye,'" remarked the Munchkin who was
watching the farmer. "`Blue paint is just the color for eyes.'
"`I think I'll make the other a little bigger,'" said the
farmer. And when the second eye was done I could see much better
than before. Then he made my nose and my mouth. But I did not
speak, because at that time I didn't know what a mouth was for. I
had the fun of watching them make my body and my arms and legs; and
when they fastened on my head, at last, I felt very proud, for I
thought I was just as good a man as anyone.
"`This fellow will scare the crows fast enough,' said the
farmer. `He looks just like a man.'
"`Why, he is a man,' said the other, and I quite agreed with
him. The farmer carried me under his arm to the cornfield, and set
me up on a tall stick, where you found me. He and his friend soon",
    ...
    "unwillingly took the place of the March Hare. The Hatter was the
only one who got any advantage from the change; and Alice was a
good deal worse off than before, as the March Hare had just upset
the milk-jug into his plate.
Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse again, so she began
very cautiously: “But I don’t understand. Where did they draw the
treacle from?”
“You can draw water out of a water-well,” said the Hatter; “so I
should think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well—eh,
stupid?”
“But they were in the well,” Alice said to the Dormouse, not
choosing to notice this last remark.
“Of course they were”, said the Dormouse: “well in.”
This answer so confused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse go
on for some time without interrupting it.
“They were learning to draw,” the Dormouse went on, yawning and
rubbing its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; “and they drew
all manner of things—everything that begins with an M——”
“Why with an M?” said Alice.
“Why not?” said the March Hare.
Alice was silent.
The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off
into a doze; but, on being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again
with a little shriek, and went on: “——that begins with an M, such
as mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and muchness—you know you
say things are ‘much of a muchness’—did you ever see such a thing
as a drawing of a muchness!”
“Really, now you ask me,” said Alice, very much confused, “I
don’t think——”
“Then you shouldn’t talk,” said the Hatter.
This piece of rudeness was more than Alice could bear: she got
up in great disgust, and walked off: the Dormouse fell asleep
instantly, and neither of the others took the least notice of her
going, though she looked back once or twice, half hoping that they
would call after her: the last time she saw them, they were trying
to put the Dormouse into the teapot.
“At any rate I’ll never go there again!” said Alice, as she
picked her way through the wood. “It's the stupidest tea-party I
ever was at in all my life!”picked her way through the wood. “It's the stupidest tea-party I
ever was at in all my life!”
Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a
door leading right into it. “That’s very curious!” she thought.
“But everything’s curious to-day. I think I may as well go in at
once.” And in she went.
Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the
little glass table. “Now, I’ll manage better this time,” she said
to herself, and began by taking the little golden key, and
unlocking the door that led into the garden. Then she went to work
nibbling at the mushroom (she had kept a piece of it in her pocket)
till she was about a foot high: then she walked down the little
passage: and then—she found herself at last in the beautiful
garden, among the bright flower-beds and the cool fountains.A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the
roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at
it, busily painting them red. Alice thought this a very curious
thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and, just as she came up
to them, she heard one of them say “Look out now, Five! Don’t go
splashing paint over me like that!”
“I couldn’t help it,” said Five, in a sulky tone. “Seven jogged
my elbow.”
On which Seven looked up and said “That’s right, Five! Always
lay the blame on others!”
“You’d better not talk!” said Five. “I heard the Queen say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded.”
“What for?” said the one who had spoken first.
“That’s none of your business, Two!” said Seven.
“Yes, it is his business!” said Five. “And I’ll tell him—it was
for bringing the cook tulip-roots instead of onions.”
Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun “Well, of all the
unjust things——” when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she
stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others
looked round also, and all of them bowed low.
“Would you tell me, please,” said Alice, a little timidly, “why
you are painting those roses?”
Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began, in a
low voice, “Why, the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to
have been a red rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake;
and if the Queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads
cut off, you know. So you see, Miss, we’re doing our best, afore
she comes, to——” At this moment, Five, who had been anxiously
looking across the garden, called out “The Queen! The Queen!”, and
the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon their
faces. There was a sound of many footsteps, and Alice looked round,
eager to see the Queen.
First came ten soldiers carrying clubs: these were all shaped
like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and
feet at the corners: next the ten courtiers: these were ornamented
all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiersall over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers
did. After these came the royal children: there were ten of them,
and the little dears came jumping merrily along, hand in hand, in
couples: they were all ornamented with hearts. Next came the
guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among them Alice recognised
the White Rabbit: it was talking in a hurried nervous manner,
smiling at everything that was said, and went by without noticing
her. Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the King’s crown
on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this grand
procession, came THE KING AND THE QUEEN OF HEARTS.
Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on
her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever
having heard of such a rule at processions; “and besides, what
would be the use of a procession,” thought she, “if people had all
to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldn’t see it?” So she
stood where she was, and waited.
When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and
looked at her, and the Queen said, severely, “Who is this?”. She
said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in
reply.
“Idiot!” said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and,
turning to Alice, she went on: “What’s your name, child?”
“My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,” said Alice very
politely; but she added, to herself, “Why, they’re only a pack of
cards, after all. I needn’t be afraid of them!”
“And who are these?” said the Queen, pointing to the three
gardeners who were lying round the rose-tree; for, you see, as they
were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs was the
same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether they were
gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her own
children.
“How should I know?” said Alice, surprised at her own courage.
“It’s no business of mine.”
The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her
for a moment like a wild beast, began screaming “Off with her head!
Off with——”",
    "for a moment like a wild beast, began screaming “Off with her head!
Off with——”
“Nonsense!” said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen
was silent.
The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said “Consider,
my dear: she is only a child!”
The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave
“Turn them over!”
The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.
“Get up!” said the Queen in a shrill, loud voice, and the three
gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the
Queen, the royal children, and everybody else.
“Leave off that!” screamed the Queen. “You make me giddy.” And
then, turning to the rose-tree, she went on “What have you been
doing here?”
“May it please your Majesty,” said Two, in a very humble tone,
going down on one knee as he spoke, “we were trying—”
“I see!” said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the
roses. “Off with their heads!” and the procession moved on, three
of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate
gardeners, who ran to Alice for protection.
“You sha’n’t be beheaded!” said Alice, and she put them into a
large flower-pot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about
for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off
after the others.
“Are their heads off?” shouted the Queen.
“Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!” the soldiers
shouted in reply.
“That’s right!” shouted the Queen. “Can you play croquet?”
The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question
was evidently meant for her.
“Yes!” shouted Alice.
“Come on, then!” roared the Queen, and Alice joined the
procession, wondering very much what would happen next.
“It’s—it’s a very fine day!” said a timid voice at her side. She
was walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her
face.
“Very,” said Alice. “Where’s the Duchess?”
“Hush! Hush!” said the Rabbit in a low hurried tone. He looked
anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himselfanxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself
upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered “She’s
under sentence of execution.”
“What for?” said Alice.
“Did you say ‘What a pity!’?” the Rabbit asked.
“No, I didn’t,” said Alice. “I don’t think it’s at all a pity. I
said ‘What for?’”
“She boxed the Queen’s ears—” the Rabbit began. Alice gave a
little scream of laughter. “Oh, hush!” the Rabbit whispered in a
frightened tone. “The Queen will hear you! You see she came rather
late, and the Queen said—”
“Get to your places!” shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder,
and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up
against each other: however, they got settled down in a minute or
two, and the game began.
Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground
in her life: it was all ridges and furrows: the croquet balls were
live hedgehogs, and the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers
had to double themselves up and stand on their hands and feet, to
make the arches.
The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her
flamingo: she succeeded in getting its body tucked away,
comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down, but
generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened out,
and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it would
twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a puzzled
expression that she could not help bursting out laughing; and when
she had got its head down, and was going to begin again, it was
very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled itself, and
was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was
generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send
the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always
getting up and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon
came to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game
indeed.
The players all played at once, without waiting for turns,indeed.
The players all played at once, without waiting for turns,
quarreling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a
very short time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went
stamping about, and shouting “Off with his head!” or “Off with her
head!” about once in a minute.
Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet
had any dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen
any minute, “and then,” thought she, “what would become of me?
They’re dreadfully fond of beheading people here: the great wonder
is, that there’s any one left alive!”
She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering
whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a
curious appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at first,
but after watching it a minute or two she made it out to be a grin,
and she said to herself “It’s the Cheshire-Cat: now I shall have
somebody to talk to.”
“How are you getting on?” said the Cat, as soon as there was
mouth enough for it to speak with.
Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. “It’s no
use speaking to it,” she thought, “till its ears have come, or at
least one of them.” In another minute the whole head appeared, and
then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the game,
feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed
to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and no more of
it appeared.
“I don’t think they play at all fairly,” Alice began, in rather
a complaining tone, “and they all quarrel so dreadfully one ca’n’t
hear oneself speak—and they don’t seem to have any rules in
particular: at least, if there are, nobody attends to them—and
you’ve no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive: for
instance, there’s the arch I’ve got to go through next walking
about at the other end of the ground—and I should have croqueted
the Queen’s hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it saw mine
coming!”
“How do you like the Queen?” said the Cat in a low voice.",
    "coming!”
“How do you like the Queen?” said the Cat in a low voice.
“Not at all,” said Alice: “she’s so extremely—” Just then she
noticed that the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went
on “—likely to win, that it’s hardly worth while finishing the
game.”
The Queen smiled and passed on.
“Who are you talking to?” said the King, going up to Alice, and
looking at the Cat’s head with great curiosity.
“It’s a friend of mine—a Cheshire-Cat,” said Alice: “allow me to
introduce it.”
“I don’t like the look of it at all,” said the King: “however,
it may kiss my hand, if it likes.”
“I’d rather not,” the Cat remarked.
“Don’t be impertinent,” said the King, “and don’t look at me
like that!” He got behind Alice as he spoke.
“A cat may look at a king,” said Alice. “I’ve read that in some
book, but I don’t remember where.”
“Well, it must be removed,” said the King very decidedly; and he
called the Queen, who was passing at the moment, “My dear! I wish
you would have this cat removed!”
The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great
or small. “Off with his head!” she said without even looking
round.
“I’ll fetch the executioner myself,” said the King eagerly, and
he hurried off.
Alice thought she might as well go back and see how the game was
going on, as she heard the Queen’s voice in the distance, screaming
with passion. She had already heard her sentence three of the
players to be executed for having missed their turns, and she did
not like the look of things at all, as the game was in such
confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or not. So
she went off in search of her hedgehog.
The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which
seemed to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them
with the other: the only difficulty was that her flamingo was gone
across the other side of the garden, where Alice could see it
trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree.
By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, theBy the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the
fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: “but it
doesn’t matter much,” thought Alice, “as all the arches are gone
from this side of the ground.” So she tucked it away under her arm,
that it might not escape again, and went back for a little more
conversation with her friend.
When she got back to the Cheshire-Cat, she was surprised to find
quite a large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going
on between the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all
talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent, and looked
very uncomfortable.
The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to
settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her,
though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard to make
out exactly what they said.
The executioner’s argument was, that you couldn’t cut off a head
unless there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had
to do such a thing before, and he wasn’t going to begin at his time
of life.
The King’s argument was that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you weren’t to talk nonsense.
The Queen’s argument was that, if something wasn’t done about it
in less than no time, she’d have everybody executed, all round. (It
was this last remark that had made the whole party look so grave
and anxious.)
Alice could think of nothing else to say but “It belongs to the
Duchess: you’d better ask her about it.”
“She’s in prison,” the Queen said to the executioner: “fetch her
here.” And the executioner went off like an arrow.
The Cat’s head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, by
the time he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely
disappeared: so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and
down, looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the
game.“You ca’n’t think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old
thing!” said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into
Alice’s, and they walked off together.
Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and
thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had
made her so savage when they met in the kitchen.
“When I’m a Duchess,” she said to herself (not in a very hopeful
tone, though), “I wo’n’t have any pepper in my kitchen at all. Soup
does very well without—Maybe it’s always pepper that makes people
hot-tempered,” she went on, very much pleased at having found out a
new kind of rule, “and vinegar that makes them sour—and camomile
that makes them bitter—and—and barley-sugar and such things that
make children sweet-tempered. I only wish people knew that: then
they wouldn’t be so stingy about it, you know——”
She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a
little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. “You’re
thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to
talk. I ca’n’t tell you just now what the moral of that is, but I
shall remember it in a bit.”
“Perhaps it hasn’t one,” Alice ventured to remark.
“Tut, tut, child!” said the Duchess. “Everything’s got a moral,
if only you can find it.” And she squeezed herself up closer to
Alice’s side as she spoke.
Alice did not much like her keeping so close to her: first,
because the Duchess was very ugly; and secondly, because she was
exactly the right height to rest her chin upon Alice’s shoulder,
and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin. However, she did not like
to be rude: so she bore it as well as she could.
“The game’s going on rather better now,” she said, by way of
keeping up the conversation a little.
“’Tis so,” said the Duchess: “and the moral of that is—‘Oh, ’tis
love, ’tis love, that makes the world go round!’”
“Somebody said,” Alice whispered, “that it’s done by everybody
minding their own business!”
“Ah, well! It means much the same thing,” said the Duchess,",
    "minding their own business!”
“Ah, well! It means much the same thing,” said the Duchess,
digging her sharp little chin into Alice’s shoulder as she added
“and the moral of that is—‘Take care of the sense, and the sounds
will take care of themselves.’”
“How fond she is of finding morals in things!” Alice thought to
herself.
“I dare say you’re wondering why I don’t put my arm round your
waist,” the Duchess said, after a pause: “the reason is, that I’m
doubtful about the temper of your flamingo. Shall I try the
experiment?”
“He might bite,” Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all
anxious to have the experiment tried.
“Very true,” said the Duchess: “flamingoes and mustard both
bite. And the moral of that is—‘Birds of a feather flock
together.’”
“Only mustard isn’t a bird,” Alice remarked.
“Right, as usual,” said the Duchess: “what a clear way you have
of putting things!”
“It’s a mineral, I think,” said Alice.
“Of course it is,” said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree
to everything that Alice said; “there’s a large mustard-mine near
here. And the moral of that is—‘The more there is of mine, the less
there is of yours.’”
“Oh, I know!” exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this last
remark. “It’s a vegetable. It doesn’t look like one, but it
is.”
“I quite agree with you,” said the Duchess; “and the moral of
that is—‘Be what you would seem to be’—or, if you’d like it put
more simply—‘Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what
it might appear to others that what you were or might have been was
not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared to them to
be otherwise.’”
“I think I should understand that better,” Alice said very
politely, “if I had it written down: but I ca’n’t quite follow it
as you say it.”
“That’s nothing to what I could say if I chose,” the Duchess
replied, in a pleased tone.
“Pray don’t trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,”
said Alice.
“Oh, don’t talk about trouble!” said the Duchess. “I make you a
present of everything I’ve said as yet.”present of everything I’ve said as yet.”
“A cheap sort of present!” thought Alice. “I’m glad they don’t
give birthday-presents like that!” But she did not venture to say
it out loud.
“Thinking again?” the Duchess asked, with another dig of her
sharp little chin.
“I’ve a right to think,” said Alice sharply, for she was
beginning to feel a little worried.
“Just about as much right,” said the Duchess, “as pigs have to
fly; and the m——”
But here, to Alice’s great surprise, the Duchess’s voice died
away, even in the middle of her favourite word “moral,” and the arm
that was linked into hers began to tremble. Alice looked up, and
there stood the Queen in front of them, with her arms folded,
frowning like a thunderstorm.
“A fine day, your Majesty!” the Duchess began in a low, weak
voice.
“Now, I give you fair warning,” shouted the Queen, stamping on
the ground as she spoke; “either you or your head must be off, and
that in about half no time! Take your choice!”
The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.
“Let’s go on with the game,” the Queen said to Alice; and Alice
was too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back
to the croquet-ground.
The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen’s absence, and
were resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they
hurried back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a
moment’s delay would cost them their lives.
All the time they were playing the Queen never left off
quarrelling with the other players, and shouting “Off with his
head!' or “Off with her head!” Those whom she sentenced were taken
into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave off being
arches to do this, so that, by the end of half an hour or so, there
were no arches left, and all the players, except the King, the
Queen, and Alice, were in custody and under sentence of
execution.
Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice,
“Have you seen the Mock Turtle yet?”
“No,” said Alice. “I don’t even know what a Mock Turtle is.”“Have you seen the Mock Turtle yet?”
“No,” said Alice. “I don’t even know what a Mock Turtle is.”
“It’s the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,” said the
Queen.
“I never saw one, or heard of one,” said Alice.
“Come on, then,” said the Queen, “and he shall tell you his
history,”
As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low
voice, to the company generally, “You are all pardoned.” “Come,
that’s a good thing!” she said to herself, for she had felt quite
unhappy at the number of executions the Queen had ordered.
They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the
sun. (If you don’t know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.)
“Up, lazy thing!” said the Queen, “and take this young lady to see
the Mock Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and see
after some executions I have ordered;” and she walked off, leaving
Alice alone with the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look of
the creature, but on the whole she thought it would be quite as
safe to stay with it as to go after that savage Queen: so she
waited.
The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the
Queen till she was out of sight: then it chuckled. “What fun!” said
the Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.
“What is the fun?” said Alice.
“Why, she,” said the Gryphon. “It’s all her fancy, that: they
never executes nobody, you know. Come on!”
“Everybody says ‘come on!’ here,” thought Alice, as she went
slowly after it: “I never was so ordered about before, in all my
life, never!”
They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the
distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as
they came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart
would break. She pitied him deeply. “What is his sorrow?” she asked
the Gryphon. And the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same
words as before, “It’s all his fancy, that: he hasn’t got no
sorrow, you know. Come on!”
So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with
large eyes full of tears, but said nothing.",
    "large eyes full of tears, but said nothing.
“This here young lady,” said the Gryphon, “she wants for to know
your history, she do.”
“I’ll tell it her,” said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone.
“Sit down, both of you, and don’t speak a word till I’ve
finished.”
So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice
thought to herself, “I don’t see how he can ever finish, if he
doesn’t begin.” But she waited patiently.
“Once,” said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, “I was a
real Turtle.”
These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by
an occasional exclamation of “Hjckrrh!” from the Gryphon, and the
constant heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly
getting up and saying, “Thank you, Sir, for your interesting
story,” but she could not help thinking there must be more to come,
so she sat still and said nothing.
“When we were little,” the Mock Turtle went on at last, more
calmly, though still sobbing a little now and then, “we went to
school in the sea. The master was an old Turtle—we used to call him
Tortoise——”
“Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn’t one?” Alice
asked.
“We called him Tortoise because he taught us,” said the Mock
Turtle angrily. “Really you are very dull!”
“You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple
question,” added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and
looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At
last the Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle “Drive on, old fellow!
Don’t be all day about it!”, and he went on in these words:—
“Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn’t believe
it——”
“I never said I didn’t!” interrupted Alice.
“You did,” said the Mock Turtle.
“Hold your tongue!” added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak
again. The Mock Turtle went on.
“We had the best of educations—in fact, we went to school every
day——”
“I’ve been to a day-school, too,” said Alice; “you needn’t be so
proud as all that.”
“With extras?” asked the Mock Turtle, a little anxiously.proud as all that.”
“With extras?” asked the Mock Turtle, a little anxiously.
“Yes,” said Alice, “we learned French and music.”
“And washing?” said the Mock Turtle.
“Certainly not!” said Alice indignantly.
“Ah! then yours wasn’t a really good school,” said the Mock
Turtle in a tone of great relief. “Now, at ours, they had at the
end of the bill, ‘French, music, and washing—extra.’”
“You couldn’t have wanted it much,” said Alice; “living at the
bottom of the sea.”
“I couldn’t afford to learn it,” said the Mock Turtle with a
sigh. “I only took the regular course.”
“What was that?” inquired Alice.
“Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,” the Mock
Turtle replied; “and then the different branches of
Arithmetic—Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.”
“I never heard of ‘Uglification,’” Alice ventured to say. “What
is it?”
The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. “What! Never
heard of uglifying!” it exclaimed. “You know what to beautify is, I
suppose?”
“Yes,” said Alice doubtfully: “it
means—to—make—anything—prettier.”
“Well, then,” the Gryphon went on, “if you don’t know what to
uglify is, you are a simpleton.”
Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about
it: so she turned to the Mock Turtle, and said “What else had you
to learn?”
“Well, there was Mystery,” the Mock Turtle replied, counting off
the subjects on his flappers,—“Mystery, ancient and modern, with
Seaography: then Drawling—the Drawling-master was an old
conger-eel, that used to come once a week: he taught us Drawling,
Stretching, and Fainting in Coils.”
“What was that like?” said Alice.
“Well, I ca’n’t show it you myself,” the Mock Turtle said: “I’m
too stiff. And the Gryphon never learnt it.”
“Hadn’t time,” said the Gryphon: “I went to the Classical
master, though. He was an old crab, he was.”
“I never went to him,” the Mock Turtle said with a sigh. “He
taught Laughing and Grief, they used to say.”
“So he did, so he did,” said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn;
and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.
“And how many hours a day did you do lessons?” said Alice, in a
hurry to change the subject.
“Ten hours the first day,” said the Mock Turtle: “nine the next,
and so on.”
“What a curious plan!” exclaimed Alice.
“That’s the reason they’re called lessons,” the Gryphon
remarked: “because they lessen from day to day.”
This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a
little before she made her next remark. “Then the eleventh day must
have been a holiday?”
“Of course it was,” said the Mock Turtle.
“And how did you manage on the twelfth?” Alice went on
eagerly.
“That’s enough about lessons,” the Gryphon interrupted in a very
decided tone. “Tell her something about the games now.”"
  ],
  [
    "The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper
across his eyes. He looked at Alice and tried to speak, but, for a
minute or two, sobs choked his voice. “Same as if he had a bone in
his throat,” said the Gryphon; and it set to work shaking him and
punching him in the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his
voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on
again:—
“You may not have lived much under the sea—” (“I haven’t,” said
Alice)—“and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster—”
(Alice began to say “I once tasted——” but checked herself hastily,
and said “No, never”) “——so you can have no idea what a delightful
thing a Lobster-Quadrille is!”
“No, indeed,” said Alice. “What sort of a dance is it?”
“Why,” said the Gryphon, “you first form into a line along the
sea-shore——”
“Two lines!” cried the Mock Turtle. “Seals, turtles, salmon, and
so on: then, when you’ve cleared all the jelly-fish out of the
way——”
“That generally takes some time,” interrupted the Gryphon.
“—you advance twice——”
“Each with a lobster as a partner!” cried the Gryphon.
“Of course,” the Mock Turtle said: “advance twice, set to
partners——”
“—change lobsters, and retire in same order,” continued the
Gryphon.
“Then, you know,” the Mock Turtle went on, “you throw the——”
“The lobsters!” shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the
air.
“—as far out to sea as you can——”
“Swim after them!” screamed the Gryphon.
“Turn a somersault in the sea!” cried the Mock Turtle, capering
wildly about.
“Change lobsters again!” yelled the Gryphon at the top of its
voice.
“Back to land again, and—that’s all the first figure,” said the
Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures,
who had been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down
again very sadly and quietly, and looked at Alice.
“It must be a very pretty dance,” said Alice timidly.
“Would you like to see a little of it?” said the Mock
Turtle.
“Very much indeed,” said Alice.
“Come, let’s try the first figure!” said the Mock Turtle to the“Very much indeed,” said Alice.
“Come, let’s try the first figure!” said the Mock Turtle to the
Gryphon. “We can do without lobsters, you know. Which shall
sing?”
“Oh, you sing,” said the Gryphon. “I’ve forgotten the
words.”
So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now
and then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and
waving their fore-paws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang
this, very slowly and sadly:—
“Will you walk a little faster?” said a whiting to a snail,
“There’s a porpoise close behind us, and he’s treading on my
tail.
See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
They are waiting on the shingle—will you come and join the
dance?
Will you, wo’n’t you, will you, wo’n’t you, will you join the
dance?
Will you, wo’n’t you, will you, wo’n’t you, wo’n’t you join the
dance?
“You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to
sea!”
But the snail replied “Too far, too far!”, and gave a look
askance—
Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the
dance.
Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the
dance.
Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the
dance.
“What matters it how far we go?” his scaly friend replied.
“There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
The further off from England the nearer is to France—
Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the
dance.
Will you, wo’n’t you, will you, wo’n’t you, will you join the
dance?
Will you, wo’n’t you, will you, wo’n’t you, wo’n’t you join the
dance?”
“Thank you, it’s a very interesting dance to watch,” said Alice,
feeling very glad that it was over at last: “and I do so like that
curious song about the whiting!”
“Oh, as to the whiting,” said the Mock Turtle, “they—you’ve seen
them, of course?”
“Yes,” said Alice, “I’ve often seen them at dinn——” she checked
herself hastily.
“I don’t know where Dinn may be,” said the Mock Turtle; “but, ifherself hastily.
“I don’t know where Dinn may be,” said the Mock Turtle; “but, if
you’ve seen them so often, of course you know what they’re
like?”
“I believe so,” Alice replied thoughtfully. “They have their
tails in their mouths—and they’re all over crumbs.”
“You’re wrong about the crumbs,” said the Mock Turtle: “crumbs
would all wash off in the sea. But they have their tails in their
mouths; and the reason is——” here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut
his eyes. “Tell her about the reason and all that,” he said to the
Gryphon.
“The reason is,” said the Gryphon, “that they would go with the
lobsters to the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So they had
to fall a long way. So they got their tails fast in their mouths.
So they couldn’t get them out again. That’s all.”
“Thank you,” said Alice, “it’s very interesting. I never knew so
much about a whiting before.”
“I can tell you more than that, if you like,” said the Gryphon.
“Do you know why it’s called a whiting?”
“I never thought about it,” said Alice. “Why?”
“It does the boots and shoes,” the Gryphon replied very
solemnly.
Alice was thoroughly puzzled. “Does the boots and shoes!” she
repeated in a wondering tone.
“Why, what are your shoes done with?” said the Gryphon. “I mean,
what makes them so shiny?”
Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she
gave her answer. “They’re done with blacking, I believe.”
“Boots and shoes under the sea,” the Gryphon went on in a deep
voice, “are done with whiting. Now you know.”
“And what are they made of?” Alice asked in a tone of great
curiosity.
“Soles and eels, of course,” the Gryphon replied rather
impatiently: “any shrimp could have told you that.”
“If I’d been the whiting,” said Alice, whose thoughts were still
running on the song, “I’d have said to the porpoise, ‘Keep back,
please! We don’t want you with us!’”
“They were obliged to have him with them,” the Mock Turtle said.
“No wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.”
“Wouldn’t it really?” said Alice in a tone of great
surprise.",
    "“Wouldn’t it really?” said Alice in a tone of great
surprise.
“Of course not,” said the Mock Turtle. “Why, if a fish came to
me, and told me he was going a journey, I should say ‘With what
porpoise?’”
“Don’t you mean ‘purpose’?” said Alice.
“I mean what I say,” the Mock Turtle replied in an offended
tone. And the Gryphon added “Come, let’s hear some of your
adventures.”
“I could tell you my adventures—beginning from this morning,”
said Alice a little timidly; “but it’s no use going back to
yesterday, because I was a different person then.”
“Explain all that,” said the Mock Turtle.
“No, no! The adventures first,” said the Gryphon in an impatient
tone: “explanations take such a dreadful time.”
So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when
she first saw the White Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it,
just at first, the two creatures got so close to her, one on each
side, and opened their eyes and mouths so very wide; but she gained
courage as she went on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she
got to the part about her repeating “You are old, Father William,”
to the Caterpillar, and the words all coming different, and then
the Mock Turtle drew a long breath, and said “That’s very
curious.”
“It’s all about as curious as it can be,” said the Gryphon.
“It all came different!” the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully.
“I should like to hear her try and repeat something now. Tell her
to begin.” He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some
kind of authority over Alice.
“Stand up and repeat ‘’Tis the voice of the sluggard,’” said the
Gryphon.
“How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat
lessons!” thought Alice; “I might as well be at school at once.”
However, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so
full of the Lobster-Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was
saying, and the words came very queer indeed:—
“’Tis the voice of the Lobster: I heard him declare
‘You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair.’
As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his noseAs a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.
[later editions continued as follows:
When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark:
But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.”]
“That’s different from what I used to say when I was a child,”
said the Gryphon.
“Well, I never heard it before,” said the Mock Turtle; “but it
sounds uncommon nonsense.”
Alice said nothing: she had sat down with her face in her hands,
wondering if anything would ever happen in a natural way again.
“I should like to have it explained,” said the Mock Turtle.
“She ca’n’t explain it,” said the Gryphon hastily. “Go on with
the next verse.”
“But about his toes?” the Mock Turtle persisted. “How could he
turn them out with his nose, you know?”
“It’s the first position in dancing.” Alice said; but was
dreadfully puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the
subject.
“Go on with the next verse,” the Gryphon repeated impatiently:
“it begins ‘I passed by his garden.’”
Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all
come wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:—
“I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie:
[later editions continued as follows:
The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon,
Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
And concluded the banquet by——”]
“What is the use of repeating all that stuff,” the Mock Turtle
interrupted, “if you don’t explain it as you go on? It’s by far the
most confusing thing I ever heard!”
“Yes, I think you’d better leave off,” said the Gryphon, and
Alice was only too glad to do so.
“Shall we try another figure of the Lobster-Quadrille?” the
Gryphon went on. “Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you
another song?”Gryphon went on. “Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you
another song?”
“Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,” Alice
replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended
tone, “Hm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her ‘Turtle Soup,’ will
you, old fellow?”
The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice choked with
sobs, to sing this:—
“Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
Waiting in a hot tureen!
Who for such dainties would not stoop?
Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
Beau—ootiful Soo—oop!
Beau—ootiful Soo—oop!
Soo—oop of the e—e—evening,
Beautiful, beautiful Soup!
“Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish,
Game, or any other dish?
Who would not give all else for two
Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
Beau—ootiful Soo—oop!
Beau—ootiful Soo—oop!
Soo—oop of the e—e—evening,
Beautiful, beauti—FUL SOUP!”
“Chorus again!” cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just
begun to repeat it, when a cry of “The trial’s beginning!” was
heard in the distance.
“Come on!” cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand, it
hurried off, without waiting for the end of the song.
“What trial is it?” Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon
only answered “Come on!” and ran the faster, while more and more
faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the
melancholy words:—
“Soo—oop of the e—e—evening,
Beautiful, beautiful Soup!”",
    "The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when
they arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them—all sorts of
little birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the
Knave was standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each
side to guard him; and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a
trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the
very middle of the court was a table, with a large dish of tarts
upon it: they looked so good, that it made Alice quite hungry to
look at them—“I wish they’d get the trial done,” she thought, “and
hand round the refreshments!” But there seemed to be no chance of
this; so she began looking at everything about her to pass away the
time.
Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had
read about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that
she knew the name of nearly everything there. “That’s the judge,”
she said to herself, “because of his great wig.”
The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown
over the wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he
did it), he did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly
not becoming.
“And that’s the jury-box,” thought Alice; “and those twelve
creatures,” (she was obliged to say “creatures,” you see, because
some of them were animals, and some were birds,) “I suppose they
are the jurors.” She said this last word two or three times over to
herself, being rather proud of it: for she thought, and rightly
too, that very few little girls of her age knew the meaning of it
at all. However, “jurymen” would have done just as well.
The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. “What
are they doing?” Alice whispered to the Gryphon. “They ca’n’t have
anything to put down yet, before the trial’s begun.”
“They’re putting down their names,” the Gryphon whispered in
reply, “for fear they should forget them before the end of the
trial.”
“Stupid things!” Alice began in a loud, indignant voice; but shetrial.”
“Stupid things!” Alice began in a loud, indignant voice; but she
stopped hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, “Silence in the
court!”, and the King put on his spectacles and looked anxiously
round, to make out who was talking.
Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their
shoulders, that all the jurors were writing down “Stupid things!”
on their slates, and she could even make out that one of them
didn’t know how to spell “stupid,” and that he had to ask his
neighbour to tell him. “A nice muddle their slates’ll be in before
the trial’s over!” thought Alice.
One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This, of course,
Alice could not stand, and she went round the court and got behind
him, and very soon found an opportunity of taking it away. She did
it so quickly that the poor little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard)
could not make out at all what had become of it; so, after hunting
all about for it, he was obliged to write with one finger for the
rest of the day; and this was of very little use, as it left no
mark on the slate.
“Herald, read the accusation!” said the King.
On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and
then unrolled the parchment-scroll, and read as follows:—
“The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
All on a summer day:
The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
And took them quite away!”
“Consider your verdict,” the King said to the jury.
“Not yet, not yet!” the Rabbit hastily interrupted. “There’s a
great deal to come before that!”
“Call the first witness,” said the King; and the White Rabbit
blew three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, “First
witness!”
The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a teacup in
one hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other. “I beg
pardon, your Majesty,” he began, “for bringing these in; but I
hadn’t quite finished my tea when I was sent for.”
“You ought to have finished,” said the King. “When did you
begin?”
The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him intobegin?”
The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into
the court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. “Fourteenth of March, I
think it was,” he said.
“Fifteenth,” said the March Hare.
“Sixteenth,” said the Dormouse.
“Write that down,” the King said to the jury; and the jury
eagerly wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then added
them up, and reduced the answer to shillings and pence.
“Take off your hat,” the King said to the Hatter.
“It isn’t mine,” said the Hatter.
“Stolen!” the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly
made a memorandum of the fact.
“I keep them to sell,” the Hatter added as an explanation. “I’ve
none of my own. I’m a hatter.”
Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring hard at
the Hatter, who turned pale and fidgeted.
“Give your evidence,” said the King; “and don’t be nervous, or
I’ll have you executed on the spot.”
This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept
shifting from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen,
and in his confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead
of the bread-and-butter.
Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which
puzzled her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was
beginning to grow larger again, and she thought at first she would
get up and leave the court; but on second thoughts she decided to
remain where she was as long as there was room for her.
“I wish you wouldn’t squeeze so.” said the Dormouse, who was
sitting next to her. “I can hardly breathe.”
“I ca’n’t help it,” said Alice very meekly: “I’m growing.”
“You’ve no right to grow here,” said the Dormouse.
“Don’t talk nonsense,” said Alice more boldly: “you know you’re
growing too.”
“Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace,” said the Dormouse: “not
in that ridiculous fashion.” And he got up very sulkily and crossed
over to the other side of the court.
All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the
Hatter, and, just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said, to",
    "Hatter, and, just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said, to
one of the officers of the court, “Bring me the list of the singers
in the last concert!” on which the wretched Hatter trembled so,
that he shook off both his shoes.
“Give your evidence,” the King repeated angrily, “or I’ll have
you executed, whether you are nervous or not.”
“I’m a poor man, your Majesty,” the Hatter began, in a trembling
voice, “—and I hadn’t begun my tea—not above a week or so—and what
with the bread-and-butter getting so thin—and the twinkling of the
tea——”
“The twinkling of what?” said the King.
“It began with the tea,” the Hatter replied.
“Of course twinkling begins with a T!” said the King sharply.
“Do you take me for a dunce? Go on!”
“I’m a poor man,” the Hatter went on, “and most things twinkled
after that—only the March Hare said——”
“I didn’t!” the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.
“You did!” said the Hatter.
“I deny it!” said the March Hare.
“He denies it,” said the King: “leave out that part.”
“Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said——” the Hatter went on,
looking anxiously round to see if he would deny it too; but the
Dormouse denied nothing, being fast asleep.
“After that,” continued the Hatter, “I cut some more
bread-and-butter——”
“But what did the Dormouse say?” one of the jury asked.
“That I ca’n’t remember,” said the Hatter.
“You must remember,” remarked the King, “or I’ll have you
executed.”
The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter,
and went down on one knee. “I’m a poor man, your Majesty,” he
began.
“You’re a very poor speaker,” said the King.
Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately
suppressed by the officers of the court. (As that is rather a hard
word, I will just explain to you how it was done. They had a large
canvas bag, which tied up at the mouth with strings: into this they
slipped the guinea-pig, head first, and then sat upon it.)
“I’m glad I’ve seen that done,” thought Alice. “I’ve so often
read in the newspapers, at the end of trials, ‘There was someread in the newspapers, at the end of trials, ‘There was some
attempt at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the
officers of the court,’ and I never understood what it meant till
now.”
“If that’s all you know about it, you may stand down,” continued
the King.
“I can’t go no lower,” said the Hatter: “I’m on the floor, as it
is.”
“Then you may sit down,” the King replied.
Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.
“Come, that finishes the guinea-pigs!” thought Alice. “Now we
shall get on better.”
“I’d rather finish my tea,” said the Hatter, with an anxious
look at the Queen, who was reading the list of singers.
“You may go,” said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the
court, without even waiting to put his shoes on.
“——and just take his head off outside,” the Queen added to one
of the officers; but the Hatter was out of sight before the officer
could get to the door.
“Call the next witness!” said the King.
The next witness was the Duchess’s cook. She carried the
pepper-box in her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before
she got into the court, by the way the people near the door began
sneezing all at once.
“Give your evidence,” said the King.
“Sha’n’t,” said the cook.
The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said, in a
low voice, “Your Majesty must cross-examine this witness.”
“Well, if I must, I must,” the King said with a melancholy air,
and, after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes
were nearly out of sight, he said, in a deep voice, “What are tarts
made of?”
“Pepper, mostly,” said the cook.
“Treacle,” said a sleepy voice behind her.
“Collar that Dormouse,” the Queen shrieked out. “Behead that
Dormouse! Turn that Dormouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him!
Off with his whiskers!”
For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the
Dormouse turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again,
the cook had disappeared.
“Never mind!” said the King, with an air of great relief. “Callthe cook had disappeared.
“Never mind!” said the King, with an air of great relief. “Call
the next witness.” And, he added, in an under-tone to the Queen,
“Really, my dear, you must cross-examine the next witness. It quite
makes my forehead ache!”
Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list,
feeling very curious to see what the next witness would be like,
“—for they haven’t got much evidence yet,” she said to herself.
Imagine her surprise, when the White Rabbit read out, at the top of
his shrill little voice, the name “Alice!”“Here!” cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the
moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she
jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with
the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of
the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding her
very much of a globe of gold-fish she had accidentally upset the
week before.
“Oh, I beg your pardon!” she exclaimed in a tone of great
dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could,
for the accident of the gold-fish kept running in her head, and she
had a vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once and
put back into the jury-box, or they would die.
“The trial cannot proceed,” said the King, in a very grave
voice, “until all the jurymen are back in their proper places—all,”
he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said
so.
Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she
had put the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was
waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to
move. She soon got it out again, and put it right; “not that it
signifies much,” she said to herself; “I should think it would be
quite as much use in the trial one way up as the other.”
As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of
being upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed
back to them, they set to work very diligently to write out a
history of the accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed too much
overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into
the roof of the court.
“What do you know about this business?” the King said to
Alice.
“Nothing,” said Alice.
“Nothing whatever?” persisted the King.
“Nothing whatever,” said Alice.
“That’s very important,” the King said, turning to the jury.
They were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when
the White Rabbit interrupted: “Unimportant, your Majesty means, of",
    "the White Rabbit interrupted: “Unimportant, your Majesty means, of
course,” he said, in a very respectful tone, but frowning and
making faces at him as he spoke.
“Unimportant, of course, I meant,” the King hastily said, and
went on to himself in an under-tone,
“important—unimportant—unimportant—important——” as if he were
trying which word sounded best.
Some of the jury wrote it down “important,” and some
“unimportant.” Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look
over their slates; “but it doesn’t matter a bit,” she thought to
herself.
At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily
writing in his note-book, called out “Silence!”, and read out from
his book, “Rule Forty-two. All persons more than a mile high to
leave the court.”
Everybody looked at Alice.
“I’m not a mile high,” said Alice.
“You are,” said the King.
“Nearly two miles high,” added the Queen.
“Well, I sha’n’t go, at any rate,” said Alice: “besides, that’s
not a regular rule: you invented it just now.”
“It’s the oldest rule in the book,” said the King.
“Then it ought to be Number One,” said Alice.
The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. “Consider
your verdict,” he said to the jury, in a low trembling voice.
“There’s more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,” said
the White Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry: “this paper has just
been picked up.”
“What’s in it?” said the Queen.
“I haven’t opened it yet,” said the White Rabbit; “but it seems
to be a letter, written by the prisoner to—to somebody.”
“It must have been that,” said the King, “unless it was written
to nobody, which isn’t usual, you know.”
“Who is it directed to?” said one of the jurymen.
“It isn’t directed at all,” said the White Rabbit: “in fact,
there’s nothing written on the outside.” He unfolded the paper as
he spoke, and added “It isn’t a letter, after all: it’s a set of
verses.”
“Are they in the prisoner’s handwriting?” asked another of the
jurymen.
“No, they’re not,” said the White Rabbit, “and that’s thejurymen.
“No, they’re not,” said the White Rabbit, “and that’s the
queerest thing about it.” (The jury all looked puzzled.)
“He must have imitated somebody else’s hand,” said the King.
(The jury all brightened up again.)
“Please your Majesty,” said the Knave, “I didn’t write it, and
they ca’n’t prove that I did: there’s no name signed at the
end.”
“If you didn’t sign it,” said the King, “that only makes the
matter worse. You must have meant some mischief, or else you’d have
signed your name like an honest man.”
There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first
really clever thing the King had said that day.
“That proves his guilt, of course,” said the Queen: “so, off
with——.”
“It doesn’t prove anything of the sort!” said Alice. “Why, you
don’t even know what they’re about!”
“Read them,” said the King.
The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. “Where shall I begin,
please your Majesty?” he asked.
“Begin at the beginning,” the King said, very gravely, “and go
on till you come to the end: then stop.”
There was dead silence in the court, whilst the White Rabbit
read out these verses:—
“They told me you had been to her,
And mentioned me to him:
She gave me a good character,
But said I could not swim.
He sent them word I had not gone
(We know it to be true):
If she should push the matter on,
What would become of you?
I gave her one, they gave him two,
You gave us three or more;
They all returned from him to you,
Though they were mine before.
If I or she should chance to be
Involved in this affair,
He trusts to you to set them free,
Exactly as we were.
My notion was that you had been
(Before she had this fit)
An obstacle that came between
Him, and ourselves, and it.
Don’t let him know she liked them best,
For this must ever be
A secret, kept from all the rest,
Between yourself and me.”
“That’s the most important piece of evidence we’ve heard yet,”
said the King, rubbing his hands; “so now let the jury——”
“If any one of them can explain it,” said Alice, (she had grown“If any one of them can explain it,” said Alice, (she had grown
so large in the last few minutes that she wasn't a bit afraid of
interrupting him,) “I’ll give him sixpence. I don't believe there’s
an atom of meaning in it.”
The jury all wrote down, on their slates, “She doesn’t believe
there’s an atom of meaning in it,” but none of them attempted to
explain the paper.
“If there’s no meaning in it,” said the King, “that saves a
world of trouble, you know, as we needn’t try to find any. And yet
I don’t know,” he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee,
and looking at them with one eye; “I seem to see some meaning in
them, after all. ‘—said I could not swim—’ you ca’n’t swim, can
you?” he added, turning to the Knave.
The Knave shook his head sadly. “Do I look like it?” he said.
(Which he certainly did not, being made entirely of cardboard.)
“All right, so far,” said the King; and he went on muttering
over the verses to himself: “‘We know it to be true’—that’s the
jury, of course—‘If she should push the matter on’—that must be the
Queen—‘What would become of you?’—What, indeed!—‘I gave her one,
they gave him two’—why, that must be what he did with the tarts,
you know——”
“But it goes on ‘they all returned from him to you,’” said
Alice.
“Why, there they are!” said the King triumphantly, pointing to
the tarts on the table. “Nothing can be clearer than that. Then
again—‘before she had this fit’—you never had fits, my dear, I
think?” he said to the Queen.
“Never!” said the Queen, furiously, throwing an inkstand at the
Lizard as she spoke. (The unfortunate little Bill had left off
writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark;
but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was trickling
down his face, as long as it lasted.)
“Then the words don’t fit you,” said the King, looking round the
court with a smile. There was a dead silence.
“It’s a pun!” the King added in an angry tone, and everybody
laughed. “Let the jury consider their verdict,” the King said, for",
    ...
    "talk all to ourselves.' I took the hint, and strolled about, and
presently the professor came to the window and called me in. He
looked grave, but said, ` I have made careful examination, but
there is no functional cause. With you I agree that there has been
much blood lost, it has been but is not. But the conditions of her
are in no way anemic. I have asked her to send me her maid, that I
may ask just one or two questions, that so I may not chance to miss
nothing. I know well what she will say. And yet there is cause.
There is always cause for everything. I must go back home and
think. You must send me the telegram every day, and if there be
cause I shall come again. The disease, for not to be well is a
disease, interest me, and the sweet, young dear, she interest me
too. She charm me, and for her, if not for you or disease, I
come.'
"As I tell you, he would not say a word more, even when we were
alone. And so now, Art, you know all I know. I shall keep stern
watch. I trust your poor father is rallying. It must be a terrible
thing to you, my dear old fellow, to be placed in such a position
between two people who are both so dear to you. I know your idea of
duty to your father, and you are right to stick to it. But if need
be, I shall send you word to come at once to Lucy, so do not be
over-anxious unless you hear from me."
DR. SEWARD'S DIARY
4 September.—Zoophagous patient still keeps up our interest in
him. He had only one outburst and that was yesterday at an unusual
time. Just before the stroke of noon he began to grow restless. The
attendant knew the symptoms, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately
the men came at a run, and were just in time, for at the stroke of
noon he became so violent that it took all their strength to hold
him. In about five minutes, however, he began to get more quiet,and
finally sank into a sort of melancholy, in which state he has
remained up to now. The attendant tells me that his screams whilst
in the paroxysm were really appalling. I found my hands full when Iin the paroxysm were really appalling. I found my hands full when I
got in, attending to some of the other patients who were frightened
by him. Indeed, I can quite understand the effect, for the sounds
disturbed even me, though I was some distance away. It is now after
the dinner hour of the asylum, and as yet my patient sits in a
corner brooding, with a dull, sullen, woe-begone look in his face,
which seems rather to indicate than to show something directly. I
cannot quite understand it.
Later.—Another change in my patient. At five o'clock I looked in
on him, and found him seemingly as happy and contented as he used
to be. He was catching flies and eating them, and was keeping note
of his capture by making nailmarks on the edge of the door between
the ridges of padding. When he saw me, he came over and apologized
for his bad conduct, and asked me in a very humble, cringing way to
be led back to his own room, and to have his notebook again. I
thought it well to humour him, so he is back in his room with the
window open. He has the sugar of his tea spread out on the window
sill, and is reaping quite a harvest of flies. He is not now eating
them, but putting them into a box, as of old, and is already
examining the corners of his room to find a spider. I tried to get
him to talk about the past few days, for any clue to his thoughts
would be of immense help to me, but he would not rise. For a moment
or two he looked very sad, and said in a sort of far away voice, as
though saying it rather to himself than to me.
"All over! All over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now
unless I do it myself!" Then suddenly turning to me in a resolute
way, he said,"Doctor, won't you be very good to me and let me have
a little more sugar? I think it would be very good for me."
"And the flies?" I said.
"Yes! The flies like it, too, and I like the flies, therefore I
like it."And there are people who know so little as to think that
madmen do not argue. I procured him a double supply, and left himmadmen do not argue. I procured him a double supply, and left him
as happy a man as, I suppose, any in the world. I wish I could
fathom his mind.
Midnight.—Another change in him. I had been to see Miss
Westenra, whom I found much better, and had just returned, and was
standing at our own gate looking at the sunset, when once more I
heard him yelling. As his room is on this side of the house, I
could hear it better than in the morning. It was a shock to me to
turn from the wonderful smoky beauty of a sunset over London, with
its lurid lights and inky shadows and all the marvellous tints that
come on foul clouds even as on foul water, and to realize all the
grim sternness of my own cold stone building, with its wealth of
breathing misery, and my own desolate heart to endure it all. I
reached him just as the sun was going down, and from his window saw
the red disc sink. As it sank he became less and less frenzied, and
just as it dipped he slid from the hands that held him, an inert
mass, on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual
recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few minutes he stood
up quite calmly and looked around him. I signalled to the
attendants not to hold him, for I was anxious to see what he would
do. He went straight over to the window and brushed out the crumbs
of sugar. Then he took his fly box, and emptied it outside, and
threw away the box. Then he shut the window, and crossing over, sat
down on his bed. All this surprised me, so I asked him,"Are you
going to keep flies any more?"
"No," said he. "I am sick of all that rubbish!" He certainly is
a wonderfully interesting study. I wish I could get some glimpse of
his mind or of the cause of his sudden passion. Stop. There may be
a clue after all, if we can find why today his paroxysms came on at
high noon and at sunset. Can it be that there is a malign influence
of the sun at periods which affects certain natures, as at times
the moon does others? We shall see.
TELEGRAM. SEWARD, LONDON, TO VAN HELSING, AMSTERDAMthe moon does others? We shall see.
TELEGRAM. SEWARD, LONDON, TO VAN HELSING, AMSTERDAM
"4 September.—Patient still better today."
TELEGRAM, SEWARD, LONDON, TO VAN HELSING, AMSTERDAM
"5 September.—Patient greatly improved. Good appetite, sleeps
naturally, good spirits, color coming back."
TELEGRAM, SEWARD, LONDON, TO VAN HELSING, AMSTERDAM
"6 September.—Terrible change for the worse. Come at once. Do
not lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen
you."",
    "6 September
"My dear Art,
"My news today is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a
bit. There is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it.
Mrs. Westenra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has
consulted me professionally about her. I took advantage of the
opportunity, and told her that my old master, Van Helsing, the
great specialist, was coming to stay with me, and that I would put
her in his charge conjointly with myself. So now we can come and go
without alarming her unduly, for a shock to her would mean sudden
death, and this, in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to
her. We are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, my poor fellow,
but, please God, we shall come through them all right. If any need
I shall write, so that, if you do not hear from me, take it for
granted that I am simply waiting for news, In haste,
"Yours ever,"
John Seward
DR. SEWARD'S DIARY
7 September.—The first thing Van Helsing said to me when we met
at Liverpool Street was, "Have you said anything to our young
friend, to lover of her?"
"No," I said. "I waited till I had seen you, as I said in my
telegram. I wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were
coming, as Miss Westenra was not so well, and that I should let him
know if need be."
"Right, my friend," he said. "Quite right! Better he not know as
yet. Perhaps he will never know. I pray so, but if it be needed,
then he shall know all. And, my good friend John, let me caution
you. You deal with the madmen. All men are mad in some way or the
other, and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so
deal with God's madmen too, the rest of the world. You tell not
your madmen what you do nor why you do it. You tell them not what
you think. So you shall keep knowledge in its place, where it may
rest, where it may gather its kind around it and breed. You and I
shall keep as yet what we know here, and here." He touched me on
the heart and on the forehead, and then touched himself the samethe heart and on the forehead, and then touched himself the same
way. "I have for myself thoughts at the present. Later I shall
unfold to you."
"Why not now?" I asked. "It may do some good. We may arrive at
some decision."He looked at me and said,"My friend John, when the
corn is grown, even before it has ripened, while the milk of its
mother earth is in him, and the sunshine has not yet begun to paint
him with his gold, the husbandman he pull the ear and rub him
between his rough hands, and blow away the green chaff, and say to
you, 'Look! He's good corn, he will make a good crop when the time
comes.' "
I did not see the application and told him so. For reply he
reached over and took my ear in his hand and pulled it playfully,
as he used long ago to do at lectures, and said, "The good
husbandman tell you so then because he knows, but not till then.
But you do not find the good husbandman dig up his planted corn to
see if he grow. That is for the children who play at husbandry, and
not for those who take it as of the work of their life. See you
now, friend John? I have sown my corn, and Nature has her work to
do in making it sprout, if he sprout at all, there's some promise,
and I wait till the ear begins to swell." He broke off, for he
evidently saw that I understood. Then he went on gravely, "You were
always a careful student, and your case book was ever more full
than the rest. And I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember,
my friend, that knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should
not trust the weaker. Even if you have not kept the good practice,
let me tell you that this case of our dear miss is one that may be,
mind, I say may be, of such interest to us and others that all the
rest may not make him kick the beam, as your people say. Take then
good note of it. Nothing is too small. I counsel you, put down in
record even your doubts and surmises. Hereafter it may be of
interest to you to see how true you guess. We learn from failure,
not from success!"interest to you to see how true you guess. We learn from failure,
not from success!"
When I described Lucy's symptoms, the same as before, but
infinitely more marked, he looked very grave, but said nothing. He
took with him a bag in which were many instruments and drugs, "the
ghastly paraphernalia of our beneficial trade," as he once called,
in one of his lectures, the equipment of a professor of the healing
craft.
When we were shown in, Mrs. Westenra met us. She was alarmed,
but not nearly so much as I expected to find her. Nature in one of
her beneficient moods has ordained that even death has some
antidote to its own terrors. Here, in a case where any shock may
prove fatal, matters are so ordered that, from some cause or other,
the things not personal, even the terrible change in her daughter
to whom she is so attached, do not seem to reach her. It is
something like the way dame Nature gathers round a foreign body an
envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil
that which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an
ordered selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one
for the vice of egoism, for there may be deeper root for its causes
than we have knowledge of.
I used my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and
set down a rule that she should not be present with Lucy, or think
of her illness more than was absolutely required. She assented
readily, so readily that I saw again the hand of Nature fighting
for life. Van Helsing and I were shown up to Lucy's room. If I was
shocked when I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw her
today.
She was ghastly, chalkily pale. The red seemed to have gone even
from her lips and gums, and the bones of her face stood out
prominently. Her breathing was painful to see or hear. Van
Helsing's face grew set as marble, and his eyebrows converged till
they almost touched over his nose. Lucy lay motionless, and did not
seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all silent.",
    "seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all silent.
Then Van Helsing beckoned to me, and we went gently out of the
room. The instant we had closed the door he stepped quickly along
the passage to the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me
quickly in with him and closed the door. "My god!" he said. "This
is dreadful. There is not time to be lost. She will die for sheer
want of blood to keep the heart's action as it should be. There
must be a transfusion of blood at once. Is it you or me?"
"I am younger and stronger, Professor. It must be me."
"Then get ready at once. I will bring up my bag. I am
prepared."
I went downstairs with him, and as we were going there was a
knock at the hall door. When we reached the hall, the maid had just
opened the door, and Arthur was stepping quickly in. He rushed up
to me, saying in an eager whisper,
"Jack, I was so anxious. I read between the lines of your
letter, and have been in an agony. The dad was better, so I ran
down here to see for myself. Is not that gentleman Dr. Van Helsing?
I am so thankful to you, sir, for coming."
When first the Professor's eye had lit upon him, he had been
angry at his interruption at such a time, but now, as he took in
his stalwart proportions and recognized the strong young manhood
which seemed to emanate from him, his eyes gleamed. Without a pause
he said to him as he held out his hand,
"Sir, you have come in time. You are the lover of our dear miss.
She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go like that."For
he suddenly grew pale and sat down in a chair almost fainting. "You
are to help her. You can do more than any that live, and your
courage is your best help."
"What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me, and I shall do
it. My life is hers' and I would give the last drop of blood in my
body for her."
The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could from old
knowledge detect a trace of its origin in his answer.
"My young sir, I do not ask so much as that, not the last!""My young sir, I do not ask so much as that, not the last!"
"What shall I do?" There was fire in his eyes, and his open
nostrils quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on the
shoulder.
"Come!" he said. "You are a man, and it is a man we want. You
are better than me, better than my friend John." Arthur looked
bewildered, and the Professor went on by explaining in a kindly
way.
"Young miss is bad, very bad. She wants blood, and blood she
must have or die. My friend John and I have consulted, and we are
about to perform what we call transfusion of blood, to transfer
from full veins of one to the empty veins which pine for him. John
was to give his blood, as he is the more young and strong than
me."—Here Arthur took my hand and wrung it hard in silence.—"But
now you are here, you are more good than us, old or young, who toil
much in the world of thought. Our nerves are not so calm and our
blood so bright than yours!"
Arthur turned to him and said, "If you only knew how gladly I
would die for her you would understand … " He stopped with a
sort of choke in his voice.
"Good boy!" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be
happy that you have done all for her you love. Come now and be
silent. You shall kiss her once before it is done, but then you
must go, and you must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame. You
know how it is with her. There must be no shock, any knowledge of
this would be one. Come!"
We all went up to Lucy's room. Arthur by direction remained
outside. Lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said nothing.
She was not asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the effort.
Her eyes spoke to us, that was all.
Van Helsing took some things from his bag and laid them on a
little table out of sight. Then he mixed a narcotic, and coming
over to the bed, said cheerily, "Now, little miss, here is your
medicine. Drink it off, like a good child. See, I lift you so that
to swallow is easy. Yes." She had made the effort with success.to swallow is easy. Yes." She had made the effort with success.
It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact,
marked the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until
sleep began to flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, the
narcotic began to manifest its potency, and she fell into a deep
sleep. When the Professor was satisfied, he called Arthur into the
room, and bade him strip off his coat. Then he added, "You may take
that one little kiss whiles I bring over the table. Friend John,
help to me!" So neither of us looked whilst he bent over her.
Van Helsing, turning to me, said, "He is so young and strong,
and of blood so pure that we need not defibrinate it."
Then with swiftness, but with absolute method, Van Helsing
performed the operation. As the transfusion went on, something like
life seemed to come back to poor Lucy's cheeks, and through
Arthur's growing pallor the joy of his face seemed absolutely to
shine. After a bit I began to grow anxious, for the loss of blood
was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. It gave me an idea of
what a terrible strain Lucy's system must have undergone that what
weakened Arthur only partially restored her.
But the Professor's face was set, and he stood watch in hand,
and with his eyes fixed now on the patient and now on Arthur. I
could hear my own heart beat. Presently, he said in a soft voice,
"Do not stir an instant. It is enough. You attend him. I will look
to her."
When all was over, I could see how much Arthur was weakened. I
dressed the wound and took his arm to bring him away, when Van
Helsing spoke without turning round, the man seems to have eyes in
the back of his head,"The brave lover, I think, deserve another
kiss, which he shall have presently." And as he had now finished
his operation, he adjusted the pillow to the patient's head. As he
did so the narrow black velvet band which she seems always to wear
round her throat, buckled with an old diamond buckle which her",
    "round her throat, buckled with an old diamond buckle which her
lover had given her, was dragged a little up, and showed a red mark
on her throat.
Arthur did not notice it, but I could hear the deep hiss of
indrawn breath which is one of Van Helsing's ways of betraying
emotion. He said nothing at the moment, but turned to me, saying,
"Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port wine,
and let him lie down a while. He must then go home and rest, sleep
much and eat much, that he may be recruited of what he has so given
to his love. He must not stay here. Hold a moment! I may take it,
sir, that you are anxious of result. Then bring it with you, that
in all ways the operation is successful. You have saved her life
this time, and you can go home and rest easy in mind that all that
can be is. I shall tell her all when she is well. She shall love
you none the less for what you have done. Goodbye."
When Arthur had gone I went back to the room. Lucy was sleeping
gently, but her breathing was stronger. I could see the counterpane
move as her breast heaved. By the bedside sat Van Helsing, looking
at her intently. The velvet band again covered the red mark. I
asked the Professor in a whisper, "What do you make of that mark on
her throat?"
"What do you make of it?"
"I have not examined it yet," I answered, and then and there
proceeded to loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein
there were two punctures, not large, but not wholesome looking.
There was no sign of disease, but the edges were white and worn
looking, as if by some trituration. It at once occurred to me that
that this wound, or whatever it was, might be the means of that
manifest loss of blood. But I abandoned the idea as soon as it
formed, for such a thing could not be. The whole bed would have
been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which the girl must have
lost to leave such a pallor as she had before the transfusion.
"Well?" said Van Helsing.
"Well," said I. "I can make nothing of it.""Well?" said Van Helsing.
"Well," said I. "I can make nothing of it."
The Professor stood up. "I must go back to Amsterdam tonight,"
he said "There are books and things there which I want. You must
remain here all night, and you must not let your sight pass from
her."
"Shall I have a nurse?" I asked.
"We are the best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all night.
See that she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. You must
not sleep all the night.Later on we can sleep, you and I. I shall
be back as soon as possible. And then we may begin."
"May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?"
"We shall see!" he answered, as he hurried out. He came back a
moment later and put his head inside the door and said with a
warning finger held up, "Remember, she is your charge. If you leave
her, and harm befall, you shall not sleep easy hereafter!"
DR. SEWARD'S DIARY—CONTINUED
8 September.—I sat up all night with Lucy. The opiate worked
itself off towards dusk, and she waked naturally. She looked a
different being from what she had been before the operation. Her
spirits even were good, and she was full of a happy vivacity, but I
could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had
undergone. When I told Mrs. Westenra that Dr. Van Helsing had
directed that I should sit up with her, she almost pooh-poohed the
idea, pointing out her daughter's renewed strength and excellent
spirits. I was firm, however, and made preparations for my long
vigil. When her maid had prepared her for the night I came in,
having in the meantime had supper, and took a seat by the
bedside.
She did not in any way make objection, but looked at me
gratefully whenever I caught her eye. After a long spell she seemed
sinking off to sleep, but with an effort seemed to pull herself
together and shook it off. It was apparent that she did not want to
sleep, so I tackled the subject at once.
"You do not want to sleep?"
"No. I am afraid."
"Afraid to go to sleep! Why so? It is the boon we all crave
for.""No. I am afraid."
"Afraid to go to sleep! Why so? It is the boon we all crave
for."
"Ah, not if you were like me, if sleep was to you a presage of
horror!"
"A presage of horror! What on earth do you mean?"
"I don't know. Oh, I don't know. And that is what is so
terrible. All this weakness comes to me in sleep, until I dread the
very thought."
"But, my dear girl, you may sleep tonight. I am here watching
you, and I can promise that nothing will happen."
"Ah, I can trust you!" she said.
I seized the opportunity, and said, "I promise that if I see any
evidence of bad dreams I will wake you at once."
"You will? Oh, will you really? How good you are to me. Then I
will sleep!" And almost at the word she gave a deep sigh of relief,
and sank back, asleep.
All night long I watched by her. She never stirred, but slept on
and on in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, healthgiving sleep. Her
lips were slightly parted, and her breast rose and fell with the
regularity of a pendulum. There was a smile on her face, and it was
evident that no bad dreams had come to disturb her peace of
mind.
In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her care
and took myself back home, for I was anxious about many things. I
sent a short wire to Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the
excellent result of the operation. My own work, with its manifold
arrears, took me all day to clear off. It was dark when I was able
to inquire about my zoophagous patient. The report was good. He had
been quite quiet for the past day and night. A telegram came from
Van Helsing at Amsterdam whilst I was at dinner, suggesting that I
should be at Hillingham tonight, as it might be well to be at hand,
and stating that he was leaving by the night mail and would join me
early in the morning.
9 September.—I was pretty tired and worn out when I got to
Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my
brain was beginning to feel that numbness which marks cerebral
exhaustion. Lucy was up and in cheerful spirits. When she shook",
    "exhaustion. Lucy was up and in cheerful spirits. When she shook
hands with me she looked sharply in my face and said,
"No sitting up tonight for you. You are worn out. I am quite
well again. Indeed, I am, and if there is to be any sitting up, it
is I who will sit up with you."
I would not argue the point, but went and had my supper. Lucy
came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence, I made an
excellent meal, and had a couple of glasses of the more than
excellent port. Then Lucy took me upstairs, and showed me a room
next her own, where a cozy fire was burning.
"Now," she said. "You must stay here. I shall leave this door
open and my door too. You can lie on the sofa for I know that
nothing would induce any of you doctors to go to bed whilst there
is a patient above the horizon. If I want anything I shall call
out, and you can come to me at once."
I could not but acquiesce, for I was dog tired, and could not
have sat up had I tried. So, on her renewing her promise to call me
if she should want anything, I lay on the sofa, and forgot all
about everything.
LUCY WESTENRA'S DIARY
9 September.—I feel so happy tonight. I have been so miserably
weak, that to be able to think and move about is like feeling
sunshine after a long spell of east wind out of a steel sky.
Somehow Arthur feels very, very close to me. I seem to feel his
presence warm about me. I suppose it is that sickness and weakness
are selfish things and turn our inner eyes and sympathy on
ourselves, whilst health and strength give love rein, and in
thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know where my
thoughts are. If only Arthur knew! My dear, my dear, your ears must
tingle as you sleep, as mine do waking. Oh, the blissful rest of
last night! How I slept, with that dear, good Dr. Seward watching
me. And tonight I shall not fear to sleep, since he is close at
hand and within call. Thank everybody for being so good to me.
Thank God! Goodnight Arthur.
DR. SEWARD'S DIARY
10 September.—I was conscious of the Professor's hand on myDR. SEWARD'S DIARY
10 September.—I was conscious of the Professor's hand on my
head, and started awake all in a second. That is one of the things
that we learn in an asylum, at any rate.
"And how is our patient?"
"Well, when I left her, or rather when she left me," I
answered.
"Come, let us see," he said. And together we went into the
room.
The blind was down, and I went over to raise it gently, whilst
Van Helsing stepped, with his soft, cat-like tread, over to the
bed.
As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the
room, I heard the Professor's low hiss of inspiration, and knowing
its rarity, a deadly fear shot through my heart. As I passed over
he moved back, and his exclamation of horror, "Gott in Himmel!"
needed no enforcement from his agonized face. He raised his hand
and pointed to the bed, and his iron face was drawn and ashen
white. I felt my knees begin to tremble.
There on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more
horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were white,
and the gums seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, as we
sometimes see in a corpse after a prolonged illness.
Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp in anger, but the instinct
of his life and all the long years of habit stood to him, and he
put it down again softly.
"Quick!" he said. "Bring the brandy."
I flew to the dining room, and returned with the decanter. He
wetted the poor white lips with it, and together we rubbed palm and
wrist and heart. He felt her heart, and after a few moments of
agonizing suspense said,
"It is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All our work
is undone. We must begin again. There is no young Arthur here now.
I have to call on you yourself this time, friend John." As he
spoke, he was dipping into his bag, and producing the instruments
of transfusion. I had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt
sleeve. There was no possibility of an opiate just at present, and
no need of one. and so, without a moment's delay, we began the
operation.no need of one. and so, without a moment's delay, we began the
operation.
After a time, it did not seem a short time either, for the
draining away of one's blood, no matter how willingly it be given,
is a terrible feeling, Van Helsing held up a warning finger. "Do
not stir," he said. "But I fear that with growing strength she may
wake, and that would make danger, oh, so much danger. But I shall
precaution take. I shall give hypodermic injection of morphia." He
proceeded then, swiftly and deftly, to carry out his intent.
The effect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge
subtly into the narcotic sleep. It was with a feeling of personal
pride that I could see a faint tinge of color steal back into the
pallid cheeks and lips. No man knows, till he experiences it, what
it is to feel his own lifeblood drawn away into the veins of the
woman he loves.
The Professor watched me critically. "That will do," he said.
"Already?" I remonstrated. "You took a great deal more from Art."
To which he smiled a sad sort of smile as he replied,
"He is her lover, her fiance. You have work, much work to do for
her and for others, and the present will suffice.
When we stopped the operation, he attended to Lucy, whilst I
applied digital pressure to my own incision. I laid down, while I
waited his leisure to attend to me, for I felt faint and a little
sick. By and by he bound up my wound, and sent me downstairs to get
a glass of wine for myself. As I was leaving the room, he came
after me, and half whispered.
"Mind, nothing must be said of this. If our young lover should
turn up unexpected, as before, no word to him. It would at once
frighten him and enjealous him, too. There must be none. So!"
When I came back he looked at me carefully, and then said, "You
are not much the worse. Go into the room, and lie on your sofa, and
rest awhile, then have much breakfast and come here to me."
I followed out his orders, for I knew how right and wise they
were. I had done my part, and now my next duty was to keep up my"
  ],
...,
  [
    "gentleman."
"But, grandmamma" —
"Leave me — go!" The young girl kissed her grandmother, and left
with her handkerchief to her eyes; at the door she found the valet
de chambre, who told her that the doctor was waiting in the
dining-room. Valentine instantly ran down. The doctor was a friend
of the family, and at the same time one of the cleverest men of the
day, and very fond of Valentine, whose birth he had witnessed. He
had himself a daughter about her age, but whose life was one
continued source of anxiety and fear to him from her mother having
been consumptive.
"Oh," said Valentine, "we have been waiting for you with such
impatience, dear M. d'Avrigny. But, first of all, how are Madeleine
and Antoinette?" Madeleine was the daughter of M. d'Avrigny, and
Antoinette his niece. M. d'Avrigny smiled sadly. "Antoinette is
very well," he said, "and Madeleine tolerably so. But you sent for
me, my dear child. It is not your father or Madame de Villefort who
is ill. As for you, although we doctors cannot divest our patients
of nerves, I fancy you have no further need of me than to recommend
you not to allow your imagination to take too wide a field."
Valentine colored. M. d'Avrigny carried the science of divination
almost to a miraculous extent, for he was one of the physicians who
always work upon the body through the mind. "No," she replied, "it
is for my poor grandmother. You know the calamity that has happened
to us, do you not?"
"I know nothing." said M. d'Avrigny.
"Alas," said Valentine, restraining her tears, "my grandfather
is dead."
"M. de Saint-Meran?"
"Yes."
"Suddenly?"
"From an apoplectic stroke."
"An apoplectic stroke?" repeated the doctor.
"Yes, and my poor grandmother fancies that her husband, whom she
never left, has called her, and that she must go and join him. Oh,
M. d'Avrigny, I beseech you, do something for her!"
"Where is she?"
"In her room with the notary."
"And M. Noirtier?"
"Just as he was, his mind perfectly clear, but the same
incapability of moving or speaking.""Just as he was, his mind perfectly clear, but the same
incapability of moving or speaking."
"And the same love for you — eh, my dear child?"
"Yes," said Valentine, "he was very fond of me."
"Who does not love you?" Valentine smiled sadly. "What are your
grandmother's symptoms?"
"An extreme nervous excitement and a strangely agitated sleep;
she fancied this morning in her sleep that her soul was hovering
above her body, which she at the same time watched. It must have
been delirium; she fancies, too, that she saw a phantom enter her
chamber and even heard the noise it made on touching her
glass."
"It is singular," said the doctor; "I was not aware that Madame
de Saint-Meran was subject to such hallucinations."
"It is the first time I ever saw her in this condition," said
Valentine; "and this morning she frightened me so that I thought
her mad; and my father, who you know is a strong-minded man,
himself appeared deeply impressed."
"We will go and see," said the doctor; "what you tell me seems
very strange." The notary here descended, and Valentine was
informed that her grandmother was alone. "Go upstairs," she said to
the doctor.
"And you?"
"Oh, I dare not — she forbade my sending for you; and, as you
say, I am myself agitated, feverish and out of sorts. I will go and
take a turn in the garden to recover myself." The doctor pressed
Valentine's hand, and while he visited her grandmother, she
descended the steps. We need not say which portion of the garden
was her favorite walk. After remaining for a short time in the
parterre surrounding the house, and gathering a rose to place in
her waist or hair, she turned into the dark avenue which led to the
bench; then from the bench she went to the gate. As usual,
Valentine strolled for a short time among her flowers, but without
gathering them. The mourning in her heart forbade her assuming this
simple ornament, though she had not yet had time to put on the
outward semblance of woe. She then turned towards the avenue. Asoutward semblance of woe. She then turned towards the avenue. As
she advanced she fancied she heard a voice speaking her name. She
stopped astonished, then the voice reached her ear more distinctly,
and she recognized it to be that of Maximilian.It was, indeed, Maximilian Morrel, who had passed a wretched
existence since the previous day. With the instinct peculiar to
lovers he had anticipated after the return of Madame de Saint-Meran
and the death of the marquis, that something would occur at M. de
Villefort's in connection with his attachment for Valentine. His
presentiments were realized, as we shall see, and his uneasy
forebodings had goaded him pale and trembling to the gate under the
chestnut-trees. Valentine was ignorant of the cause of this sorrow
and anxiety, and as it was not his accustomed hour for visiting
her, she had gone to the spot simply by accident or perhaps through
sympathy. Morrel called her, and she ran to the gate. "You here at
this hour?" said she. "Yes, my poor girl," replied Morrel; "I come
to bring and to hear bad tidings."
"This is, indeed, a house of mourning," said Valentine; "speak,
Maximilian, although the cup of sorrow seems already full."
"Dear Valentine," said Morrel, endeavoring to conceal his own
emotion, "listen, I entreat you; what I am about to say is very
serious. When are you to be married?"
"I will tell you all," said Valentine; "from you I have nothing
to conceal. This morning the subject was introduced, and my dear
grandmother, on whom I depended as my only support, not only
declared herself favorable to it, but is so anxious for it, that
they only await the arrival of M. d'Epinay, and the following day
the contract will be signed." A deep sigh escaped the young man,
who gazed long and mournfully at her he loved. "Alas," replied he,
"it is dreadful thus to hear my condemnation from your own lips.
The sentence is passed, and, in a few hours, will be executed; it
must be so, and I will not endeavor to prevent it. But, since you
say nothing remains but for M. d'Epinay to arrive that the contract
may be signed, and the following day you will be his, to-morrow you
will be engaged to M. d'Epinay, for he came this morning to Paris."
Valentine uttered a cry.",
    "will be engaged to M. d'Epinay, for he came this morning to Paris."
Valentine uttered a cry.
"I was at the house of Monte Cristo an hour since," said Morrel;
"we were speaking, he of the sorrow your family had experienced,
and I of your grief, when a carriage rolled into the court-yard.
Never, till then, had I placed any confidence in presentiments, but
now I cannot help believing them, Valentine. At the sound of that
carriage I shuddered; soon I heard steps on the staircase, which
terrified me as much as the footsteps of the commander did Don
Juan. The door at last opened; Albert de Morcerf entered first, and
I began to hope my fears were vain, when, after him, another young
man advanced, and the count exclaimed — `Ah, here is the Baron
Franz d'Epinay!' I summoned all my strength and courage to my
support. Perhaps I turned pale and trembled, but certainly I
smiled; and five minutes after I left, without having heard one
word that had passed."
"Poor Maximilian!" murmured Valentine.
"Valentine, the time has arrived when you must answer me. And
remember my life depends on your answer. What do you intend doing?"
Valentine held down her head; she was overwhelmed.
"Listen," said Morrel; "it is not the first time you have
contemplated our present position, which is a serious and urgent
one; I do not think it is a moment to give way to useless sorrow;
leave that for those who like to suffer at their leisure and
indulge their grief in secret. There are such in the world, and God
will doubtless reward them in heaven for their resignation on
earth, but those who mean to contend must not lose one precious
moment, but must return immediately the blow which fortune strikes.
Do you intend to struggle against our ill-fortune? Tell me,
Valentine for it is that I came to know."
Valentine trembled, and looked at him with amazement. The idea
of resisting her father, her grandmother, and all the family, had
never occurred to her. "What do you say, Maximilian?" asked
Valentine. "What do you mean by a struggle? Oh, it would be aValentine. "What do you mean by a struggle? Oh, it would be a
sacrilege. What? I resist my father's order, and my dying
grandmother's wish? Impossible!" Morrel started. "You are too noble
not to understand me, and you understand me so well that you
already yield, dear Maximilian. No, no; I shall need all my
strength to struggle with myself and support my grief in secret, as
you say. But to grieve my father — to disturb my grandmother's last
moments — never!"
"You are right," said Morrel, calmly.
"In what a tone you speak!" cried Valentine.
"I speak as one who admires you, mademoiselle."
"Mademoiselle," cried Valentine; "mademoiselle! Oh, selfish man,
— he sees me in despair, and pretends he cannot understand me!"
"You mistake — I understand you perfectly. You will not oppose
M. Villefort, you will not displease the marchioness, and to-morrow
you will sign the contract which will bind you to your
husband."
"But, mon Dieu, tell me, how can I do otherwise?"
"Do not appeal to me, mademoiselle; I shall be a bad judge in
such a case; my selfishness will blind me," replied Morrel, whose
low voice and clinched hands announced his growing desperation.
"What would you have proposed, Maximilian, had you found me
willing to accede?"
"It is not for me to say."
"You are wrong; you must advise me what to do."
"Do you seriously ask my advice, Valentine?"
"Certainly, dear Maximilian, for if it is good, I will follow
it; you know my devotion to you."
"Valentine," said Morrel pushing aside a loose plank, "give me
your hand in token of forgiveness of my anger; my senses are
confused, and during the last hour the most extravagant thoughts
have passed through my brain. Oh, if you refuse my advice" —
"What do you advise?" said Valentine, raising her eyes to heaven
and sighing. "I am free," replied Maximilian, "and rich enough to
support you. I swear to make you my lawful wife before my lips even
shall have approached your forehead."
"You make me tremble!" said the young girl.shall have approached your forehead."
"You make me tremble!" said the young girl.
"Follow me," said Morrel; "I will take you to my sister, who is
worthy also to be yours. We will embark for Algiers, for England,
for America, or, if your prefer it, retire to the country and only
return to Paris when our friends have reconciled your family."
Valentine shook her head. "I feared it, Maximilian," said she; "it
is the counsel of a madman, and I should be more mad than you, did
I not stop you at once with the word `Impossible, impossible!'"
"You will then submit to what fate decrees for you without even
attempting to contend with it?" said Morrel sorrowfully. "Yes, — if
I die!"
"Well, Valentine," resumed Maximilian, "I can only say again
that you are right. Truly, it is I who am mad, and you prove to me
that passion blinds the most well-meaning. I appreciate your calm
reasoning. It is then understood that to-morrow you will be
irrevocably promised to M. Franz d'Epinay, not only by that
theatrical formality invented to heighten the effect of a comedy
called the signature of the contract, but your own will?"
"Again you drive me to despair, Maximilian," said Valentine,
"again you plunge the dagger into the wound! What would you do,
tell me, if your sister listened to such a proposition?"
"Mademoiselle," replied Morrel with a bitter smile, "I am
selfish — you have already said so — and as a selfish man I think
not of what others would do in my situation, but of what I intend
doing myself. I think only that I have known you not a whole year.
From the day I first saw you, all my hopes of happiness have been
in securing your affection. One day you acknowledged that you loved
me, and since that day my hope of future happiness has rested on
obtaining you, for to gain you would be life to me. Now, I think no
more; I say only that fortune has turned against me — I had thought
to gain heaven, and now I have lost it. It is an every-day
occurrence for a gambler to lose not only what he possesses but",
    "occurrence for a gambler to lose not only what he possesses but
also what he has not." Morrel pronounced these words with perfect
calmness; Valentine looked at him a moment with her large,
scrutinizing eyes, endeavoring not to let Morrel discover the grief
which struggled in her heart. "But, in a word, what are you going
to do?" asked she.
"I am going to have the honor of taking my leave of you,
mademoiselle, solemnly assuring you that I wish your life may be so
calm, so happy, and so fully occupied, that there may be no place
for me even in your memory."
"Oh!" murmured Valentine.
"Adieu, Valentine, adieu!" said Morrel, bowing.
"Where are you going?" cried the young girl, extending her hand
through the opening, and seizing Maximilian by his coat, for she
understood from her own agitated feelings that her lover's calmness
could not be real; "where are you going?"
"I am going, that I may not bring fresh trouble into your
family: and to set an example which every honest and devoted man,
situated as I am, may follow."
"Before you leave me, tell me what you are going to do,
Maximilian." The young man smiled sorrowfully. "Speak, speak!" said
Valentine; "I entreat you."
"Has your resolution changed, Valentine?"
"It cannot change, unhappy man; you know it must not!" cried the
young girl. "Then adieu, Valentine!" Valentine shook the gate with
a strength of which she could not have been supposed to be
possessed, as Morrel was going away, and passing both her hands
through the opening, she clasped and wrung them. "I must know what
you mean to do!" said she. "Where are you going?"
"Oh, fear not," said Maximilian, stopping at a short distance,
"I do not intend to render another man responsible for the rigorous
fate reserved for me. Another might threaten to seek M. Franz, to
provoke him, and to fight with him; all that would be folly. What
has M. Franz to do with it? He saw me this morning for the first
time, and has already forgotten he has seen me. He did not eventime, and has already forgotten he has seen me. He did not even
know I existed when it was arranged by your two families that you
should be united. I have no enmity against M. Franz, and promise
you the punishment shall not fall on him."
"On whom, then! — on me?"
"On you? Valentine! Oh, heaven forbid! Woman is sacred; the
woman one loves is holy."
"On yourself, then, unhappy man; on yourself?"
"I am the only guilty person, am I not?' said Maximilian.
"Maximilian!" said Valentine, "Maximilian, come back, I entreat
you!" He drew near with his sweet smile, and but for his paleness
one might have thought him in his usual happy mood. "Listen, my
dear, my adored Valentine," said he in his melodious and grave
tone; "those who, like us, have never had a thought for which we
need blush before the world, such may read each other's hearts. I
never was romantic, and am no melancholy hero. I imitate neither
Manfred nor Anthony; but without words, protestations, or vows, my
life has entwined itself with yours; you leave me, and you are
right in doing so, — I repeat it, you are right; but in losing you,
I lose my life.
"The moment you leave me, Valentine, I am alone in the world. My
sister is happily married; her husband is only my brother-in-law,
that is, a man whom the ties of social life alone attach to me; no
one then longer needs my useless life. This is what I shall do; I
will wait until the very moment you are married, for I will not
lose the shadow of one of those unexpected chances which are
sometimes reserved for us, since M. Franz may, after all, die
before that time, a thunderbolt may fall even on the altar as you
approach it, — nothing appears impossible to one condemned to die,
and miracles appear quite reasonable when his escape from death is
concerned. I will, then, wait until the last moment, and when my
misery is certain, irremediable, hopeless, I will write a
confidential letter to my brother-in-law, another to the prefect of
police, to acquaint them with my intention, and at the corner ofpolice, to acquaint them with my intention, and at the corner of
some wood, on the brink of some abyss, on the bank of some river, I
will put an end to my existence, as certainly as I am the son of
the most honest man who ever lived in France."
Valentine trembled convulsively; she loosened her hold of the
gate, her arms fell by her side, and two large tears rolled down
her cheeks. The young man stood before her, sorrowful and resolute.
"Oh, for pity's sake," said she, "you will live, will you not?"
"No, on my honor," said Maximilian; "but that will not affect
you. You have done your duty, and your conscience will be at rest."
Valentine fell on her knees, and pressed her almost bursting heart.
"Maximilian," said she, "Maximilian, my friend, my brother on
earth, my true husband in heaven, I entreat you, do as I do, live
in suffering; perhaps we may one day be united."
"Adieu, Valentine," repeated Morrel.
"My God," said Valentine, raising both her hands to heaven with
a sublime expression, "I have done my utmost to remain a submissive
daughter; I have begged, entreated, implored; he has regarded
neither my prayers, my entreaties, nor my tears. It is done," cried
she, willing away her tears, and resuming her firmness, "I am
resolved not to die of remorse, but rather of shame. Live,
Maximilian, and I will be yours. Say when shall it be? Speak,
command, I will obey." Morrel, who had already gone some few steps
away, again returned, and pale with joy extended both hands towards
Valentine through the opening. "Valentine," said he, "dear
Valentine, you must not speak thus — rather let me die. Why should
I obtain you by violence, if our love is mutual? Is it from mere
humanity you bid me live? I would then rather die."
"Truly," murmured Valentine, "who on this earth cares for me, if
he does not? Who has consoled me in my sorrow but he? On whom do my
hopes rest? On whom does my bleeding heart repose? On him, on him,
always on him! Yes, you are right, Maximilian, I will follow you. I",
    "always on him! Yes, you are right, Maximilian, I will follow you. I
will leave the paternal home, I will give up all. Oh, ungrateful
girl that I am," cried Valentine, sobbing, "I will give up all,
even my dear old grandfather, whom I had nearly forgotten."
"No," said Maximilian, "you shall not leave him. M. Noirtier has
evinced, you say, a kind feeling towards me. Well, before you
leave, tell him all; his consent would be your justification in
God's sight. As soon as we are married, he shall come and live with
us, instead of one child, he shall have two. You have told me how
you talk to him and how he answers you; I shall very soon learn
that language by signs, Valentine, and I promise you solemnly, that
instead of despair, it is happiness that awaits us."
"Oh, see, Maximilian, see the power you have over me, you almost
make me believe you; and yet, what you tell me is madness, for my
father will curse me — he is inflexible — he will never pardon me.
Now listen to me, Maximilian; if by artifice, by entreaty, by
accident — in short, if by any means I can delay this marriage,
will you wait?"
"Yes, I promise you, as faithfully as you have promised me that
this horrible marriage shall not take place, and that if you are
dragged before a magistrate or a priest, you will refuse."
"I promise you by all that is most sacred to me in the world,
namely, by my mother."
"We will wait, then," said Morrel.
"Yes, we will wait," replied Valentine, who revived at these
words; "there are so many things which may save unhappy beings such
as we are."
"I rely on you, Valentine," said Morrel; "all you do will be
well done; only if they disregard your prayers, if your father and
Madame de Saint-Meran insist that M. d'Epinay should be called
to-morrow to sign the contract" —
"Then you have my promise, Maximilian."
"Instead of signing" —
"I will go to you, and we will fly; but from this moment until
then, let us not tempt providence, let us not see each other. It is
a miracle, it is a providence that we have not been discovered. Ifa miracle, it is a providence that we have not been discovered. If
we were surprised, if it were known that we met thus, we should
have no further resource."
"You are right, Valentine; but how shall I ascertain?"
"From the notary, M. Deschamps."
"I know him."
"And for myself — I will write to you, depend on me. I dread
this marriage, Maximilian, as much as you."
"Thank you, my adored Valentine, thank you; that is enough. When
once I know the hour, I will hasten to this spot, you can easily
get over this fence with my assistance, a carriage will await us at
the gate, in which you will accompany me to my sister's; there
living, retired or mingling in society, as you wish, we shall be
enabled to use our power to resist oppression, and not suffer
ourselves to be put to death like sheep, which only defend
themselves by sighs."
"Yes," said Valentine, "I will now acknowledge you are right,
Maximilian; and now are you satisfied with your betrothal?" said
the young girl sorrowfully.
"My adored Valentine, words cannot express one half of my
satisfaction." Valentine had approached, or rather, had placed her
lips so near the fence, that they nearly touched those of Morrel,
which were pressed against the other side of the cold and
inexorable barrier. "Adieu, then, till we meet again," said
Valentine, tearing herself away. "I shall hear from you?"
"Yes."
"Thanks, thanks, dear love, adieu!" The sound of a kiss was
heard, and Valentine fled through the avenue. Morrel listened to
catch the last sound of her dress brushing the branches, and of her
footstep on the gravel, then raised his eyes with an ineffable
smile of thankfulness to heaven for being permitted to be thus
loved, and then also disappeared. The young man returned home and
waited all the evening and all the next day without getting any
message. It was only on the following day, at about ten o'clock in
the morning, as he was starting to call on M. Deschamps, the
notary, that he received from the postman a small billet, which henotary, that he received from the postman a small billet, which he
knew to be from Valentine, although he had not before seen her
writing. It was to this effect: —
Tears, entreaties, prayers, have availed me nothing. Yesterday,
for two hours, I was at the church of Saint-Phillippe du Roule, and
for two hours I prayed most fervently. Heaven is as inflexible as
man, and the signature of the contract is fixed for this evening at
nine o'clock. I have but one promise and but one heart to give;
that promise is pledged to you, that heart is also yours. This
evening, then, at a quarter to nine at the gate.
Your betrothed,
Valentine de Villefort.
P.S. — My poor grandmother gets worse and worse; yesterday her
fever amounted to delirium; to-day her delirium is almost madness.
You will be very kind to me, will you not, Morrel, to make me
forget my sorrow in leaving her thus? I think it is kept a secret
from grandpapa Noirtier, that the contract is to be signed this
evening.
Morrel went also to the notary, who confirmed the news that the
contract was to be signed that evening. Then he went to call on
Monte Cristo and heard still more. Franz had been to announce the
ceremony, and Madame de Villefort had also written to beg the count
to excuse her not inviting him; the death of M. de Saint-Meran and
the dangerous illness of his widow would cast a gloom over the
meeting which she would regret should be shared by the count whom
she wished every happiness. The day before Franz had been presented
to Madame de Saint-Meran, who had left her bed to receive him, but
had been obliged to return to it immediately after. It is easy to
suppose that Morrel's agitation would not escape the count's
penetrating eye. Monte Cristo was more affectionate than ever, —
indeed, his manner was so kind that several times Morrel was on the
point of telling him all. But he recalled the promise he had made
to Valentine, and kept his secret.
The young man read Valentine's letter twenty times in the course",
    "to Valentine, and kept his secret.
The young man read Valentine's letter twenty times in the course
of the day. It was her first, and on what an occasion! Each time he
read it he renewed his vow to make her happy. How great is the
power of a woman who has made so courageous a resolution! What
devotion does she deserve from him for whom she has sacrificed
everything! How ought she really to be supremely loved! She becomes
at once a queen and a wife, and it is impossible to thank and love
her sufficiently. Morrel longed intensely for the moment when he
should hear Valentine say, "Here I am, Maximilian; come and help
me." He had arranged everything for her escape; two ladders were
hidden in the clover-field; a cabriolet was ordered for Maximilian
alone, without a servant, without lights; at the turning of the
first street they would light the lamps, as it would be foolish to
attract the notice of the police by too many precautions.
Occasionally he shuddered; he thought of the moment when, from the
top of that wall, he should protect the descent of his dear
Valentine, pressing in his arms for the first time her of whom he
had yet only kissed the delicate hand.
When the afternoon arrived and he felt that the hour was drawing
near, he wished for solitude, his agitation was extreme; a simple
question from a friend would have irritated him. He shut himself in
his room, and tried to read, but his eye glanced over the page
without understanding a word, and he threw away the book, and for
the second time sat down to sketch his plan, the ladders and the
fence. At length the hour drew near. Never did a man deeply in love
allow the clocks to go on peacefully. Morrel tormented his so
effectually that they struck eight at half-past six. He then said,
"It is time to start; the signature was indeed fixed to take place
at nine o'clock, but perhaps Valentine will not wait for that."
Consequently, Morrel, having left the Rue Meslay at half-past eight
by his timepiece, entered the clover-field while the clock ofby his timepiece, entered the clover-field while the clock of
Saint-Phillippe du Roule was striking eight. The horse and
cabriolet were concealed behind a small ruin, where Morrel had
often waited.
The night gradually drew on, and the foliage in the garden
assumed a deeper hue. Then Morrel came out from his hiding-place
with a beating heart, and looked through the small opening in the
gate; there was yet no one to be seen. The clock struck half-past
eight, and still another half-hour was passed in waiting, while
Morrel walked to and fro, and gazed more and more frequently
through the opening. The garden became darker still, but in the
darkness he looked in vain for the white dress, and in the silence
he vainly listened for the sound of footsteps. The house, which was
discernible through the trees, remained in darkness, and gave no
indication that so important an event as the signature of a
marriage-contract was going on. Morrel looked at his watch, which
wanted a quarter to ten; but soon the same clock he had already
heard strike two or three times rectified the error by striking
half-past nine.
This was already half an hour past the time Valentine had fixed.
It was a terrible moment for the young man. The slightest rustling
of the foliage, the least whistling of the wind, attracted his
attention, and drew the perspiration to his brow; then he
tremblingly fixed his ladder, and, not to lose a moment, placed his
foot on the first step. Amidst all these alternations of hope and
fear, the clock struck ten. "It is impossible," said Maximilian,
"that the signing of a contract should occupy so long a time
without unexpected interruptions. I have weighed all the chances,
calculated the time required for all the forms; something must have
happened." And then he walked rapidly to and fro, and pressed his
burning forehead against the fence. Had Valentine fainted? or had
she been discovered and stopped in her flight? These were the only
obstacles which appeared possible to the young man.obstacles which appeared possible to the young man.
The idea that her strength had failed her in attempting to
escape, and that she had fainted in one of the paths, was the one
that most impressed itself upon his mind. "In that case," said he,
"I should lose her, and by my own fault." He dwelt on this idea for
a moment, then it appeared reality. He even thought he could
perceive something on the ground at a distance; he ventured to
call, and it seemed to him that the wind wafted back an almost
inarticulate sigh. At last the half-hour struck. It was impossible
to wait longer, his temples throbbed violently, his eyes were
growing dim; he passed one leg over the wall, and in a moment
leaped down on the other side. He was on Villefort's premises — had
arrived there by scaling the wall. What might be the consequences?
However, he had not ventured thus far to draw back. He followed a
short distance close under the wall, then crossed a path, hid
entered a clump of trees. In a moment he had passed through them,
and could see the house distinctly. Then Morrel saw that he had
been right in believing that the house was not illuminated. Instead
of lights at every window, as is customary on days of ceremony, he
saw only a gray mass, which was veiled also by a cloud, which at
that moment obscured the moon's feeble light. A light moved rapidly
from time to time past three windows of the second floor. These
three windows were in Madame de Saint-Meran's room. Another
remained motionless behind some red curtains which were in Madame
de Villefort's bedroom. Morrel guessed all this. So many times, in
order to follow Valentine in thought at every hour in the day, had
he made her describe the whole house, that without having seen it
he knew it all.
This darkness and silence alarmed Morrel still more than
Valentine's absence had done. Almost mad with grief, and determined
to venture everything in order to see Valentine once more, and be
certain of the misfortune he feared, Morrel gained the edge of the",
    ...
    "having now three or four hours before him he had best fortify
himself against the fatigues of the morrow by a sound sleep and a
good supper. A waiter opened the door.
"My friend," said Andrea, "I have been dining at
Saint-Jean-au-Bois, and expected to catch the coach which passes by
at midnight, but like a fool I have lost my way, and have been
walking for the last four hours in the forest. Show me into one of
those pretty little rooms which overlook the court, and bring me a
cold fowl and a bottle of Bordeaux." The waiter had no suspicions;
Andrea spoke with perfect composure, he had a cigar in his mouth,
and his hands in the pocket of his top coat; his clothes were
fashionably made, his chin smooth, his boots irreproachable; he
looked merely as if he had stayed out very late, that was all.
While the waiter was preparing his room, the hostess arose; Andrea
assumed his most charming smile, and asked if he could have No. 3,
which he had occupied on his last stay at Compiegne. Unfortunately,
No. 3 was engaged by a young man who was travelling with his
sister. Andrea appeared in despair, but consoled himself when the
hostess assured him that No. 7, prepared for him, was situated
precisely the same as No. 3, and while warming his feet and
chatting about the last races at Chantilly, he waited until they
announced his room to be ready.
Andrea had not spoken without cause of the pretty rooms looking
out upon the court of the Bell Tavern, which with its triple
galleries like those of a theatre, with the jessamine and clematis
twining round the light columns, forms one of the prettiest
entrances to an inn that you can imagine. The fowl was tender, the
wine old, the fire clear and sparkling, and Andrea was surprised to
find himself eating with as good an appetite as though nothing had
happened. Then he went to bed and almost immediately fell into that
deep sleep which is sure to visit men of twenty years of age, even
when they are torn with remorse. Now, here we are obliged to ownwhen they are torn with remorse. Now, here we are obliged to own
that Andrea ought to have felt remorse, but that he did not. This
was the plan which had appealed to him to afford the best chance of
his security. Before daybreak he would awake, leave the inn after
rigorously paying his bill, and reaching the forest, he would,
under pretence of making studies in painting, test the hospitality
of some peasants, procure himself the dress of a woodcutter and a
hatchet, casting off the lion's skin to assume that of the woodman;
then, with his hands covered with dirt, his hair darkened by means
of a leaden comb, his complexion embrowned with a preparation for
which one of his old comrades had given him the recipe, he
intended, by following the wooded districts, to reach the nearest
frontier, walking by night and sleeping in the day in the forests
and quarries, and only entering inhabited regions to buy a loaf
from time to time.
Once past the frontier, Andrea proposed making money of his
diamonds; and by uniting the proceeds to ten bank-notes he always
carried about with him in case of accident, he would then find
himself possessor of about 50,000 livres, which he philosophically
considered as no very deplorable condition after all. Moreover, he
reckoned much on the interest of the Danglars to hush up the rumor
of their own misadventures. These were the reasons which, added to
the fatigue, caused Andrea to sleep so soundly. In order that he
might awaken early he did not close the shutters, but contented
himself with bolting the door and placing on the table an unclasped
and long-pointed knife, whose temper he well knew, and which was
never absent from him. About seven in the morning Andrea was
awakened by a ray of sunlight, which played, warm and brilliant,
upon his face. In all well-organized brains, the predominating idea
— and there always is one — is sure to be the last thought before
sleeping, and the first upon waking in the morning. Andrea had
scarcely opened his eyes when his predominating idea presentedscarcely opened his eyes when his predominating idea presented
itself, and whispered in his ear that he had slept too long. He
jumped out of bed and ran to the window. A gendarme was crossing
the court. A gendarme is one of the most striking objects in the
world, even to a man void of uneasiness; but for one who has a
timid conscience, and with good cause too, the yellow, blue, and
white uniform is really very alarming.
"Why is that gendarme there?" asked Andrea of himself. Then, all
at once, he replied, with that logic which the reader has,
doubtless, remarked in him, "There is nothing astonishing in seeing
a gendarme at an inn; instead of being astonished, let me dress
myself." And the youth dressed himself with a facility his valet de
chambre had failed to rob him of during the two months of
fashionable life he had led in Paris. "Now then," said Andrea,
while dressing himself, "I'll wait till he leaves, and then I'll
slip away." And, saying this, Andrea, who had now put on his boots
and cravat, stole gently to the window, and a second time lifted up
the muslin curtain. Not only was the first gendarme still there,
but the young man now perceived a second yellow, blue, and white
uniform at the foot of the staircase, the only one by which he
could descend, while a third, on horseback, holding a musket in his
fist, was posted as a sentinel at the great street door which alone
afforded the means of egress.
The appearance of the third gendarme settled the matter, for a
crowd of curious loungers was extended before him, effectually
blocking the entrance to the hotel. "They're after me!" was
Andrea's first thought. "The devil!" A pallor overspread the young
man's forehead, and he looked around him with anxiety. His room,
like all those on the same floor, had but one outlet to the gallery
in the sight of everybody. "I am lost!" was his second thought;
and, indeed, for a man in Andrea's situation, an arrest meant the
assizes, trial, and death, — death without mercy or delay. For a",
    "assizes, trial, and death, — death without mercy or delay. For a
moment he convulsively pressed his head within his hands, and
during that brief period he became nearly mad with terror; but soon
a ray of hope glimmered in the multitude of thoughts which
bewildered his mind, and a faint smile played upon his white lips
and pallid cheeks. He looked around and saw the objects of his
search upon the chimney-piece; they were a pen, ink, and paper.
With forced composure he dipped the pen in the ink, and wrote the
following lines upon a sheet of paper: —
"I have no money to pay my bill, but I am not a dishonest man; I
leave behind me as a pledge this pin, worth ten times the amount. I
shall be excused for leaving at daybreak, for I was ashamed."
He then drew the pin from his cravat and placed it on the paper.
This done, instead of leaving the door fastened, he drew back the
bolts and even placed the door ajar, as though he had left the
room, forgetting to close it, and slipping into the chimney like a
man accustomed to that kind of gymnastic exercise, having effaced
the marks of his feet upon the floor, he commenced climbing the
only opening which afforded him the means of escape. At this
precise time, the first gendarme Andrea had noticed walked
up-stairs, preceded by the commissary of police, and supported by
the second gendarme who guarded the staircase and was himself
re-enforced by the one stationed at the door.
Andrea was indebted for this visit to the following
circumstances. At daybreak, the telegraphs were set at work in all
directions, and almost immediately the authorities in every
district had exerted their utmost endeavors to arrest the murderer
of Caderousse. Compiegne, that royal residence and fortified town,
is well furnished with authorities, gendarmes, and commissaries of
police; they therefore began operations as soon as the telegraphic
despatch arrived, and the Bell and Bottle being the best-known
hotel in the town, they had naturally directed their first
inquiries there.hotel in the town, they had naturally directed their first
inquiries there.
Now, besides the reports of the sentinels guarding the Hotel de
Ville, which is next door to the Bell and Bottle, it had been
stated by others that a number of travellers had arrived during the
night. The sentinel who was relieved at six o'clock in the morning,
remembered perfectly that just as he was taking his post a few
minutes past four a young man arrived on horseback, with a little
boy before him. The young man, having dismissed the boy and horse,
knocked at the door of the hotel, which was opened, and again
closed after his entrance. This late arrival had attracted much
suspicion, and the young man being no other than Andrea, the
commissary and gendarme, who was a brigadier, directed their steps
towards his room.
They found the door ajar. "Oh, ho," said the brigadier, who
thoroughly understood the trick; "a bad sign to find the door open!
I would rather find it triply bolted." And, indeed, the little note
and pin upon the table confirmed, or rather corroborated, the sad
truth. Andrea had fled. We say corroborated, because the brigadier
was too experienced to be convinced by a single proof. He glanced
around, looked in the bed, shook the curtains, opened the closets,
and finally stopped at the chimney. Andrea had taken the precaution
to leave no traces of his feet in the ashes, but still it was an
outlet, and in this light was not to be passed over without serious
investigation.
The brigadier sent for some sticks and straw, and having filled
the chimney with them, set a light to it. The fire crackled, and
the smoke ascended like the dull vapor from a volcano; but still no
prisoner fell down, as they expected. The fact was, that Andrea, at
war with society ever since his youth, was quite as deep as a
gendarme, even though he were advanced to the rank of brigadier,
and quite prepared for the fire, he had climbed out on the roof and
was crouching down against the chimney-pots. At one time he thoughtwas crouching down against the chimney-pots. At one time he thought
he was saved, for he heard the brigadier exclaim in a loud voice,
to the two gendarmes, "He is not here!" But venturing to peep, he
perceived that the latter, instead of retiring, as might have been
reasonably expected upon this announcement, were watching with
increased attention.
It was now his turn to look about him; the Hotel de Ville, a
massive sixteenth century building, was on his right; any one could
descend from the openings in the tower, and examine every corner of
the roof below, and Andrea expected momentarily to see the head of
a gendarme appear at one of these openings. If once discovered, he
knew he would be lost, for the roof afforded no chance of escape;
he therefore resolved to descend, not through the same chimney by
which he had come up, but by a similar one conducting to another
room. He looked around for a chimney from which no smoke issued,
and having reached it, he disappeared through the orifice without
being seen by any one. At the same minute, one of the little
windows of the Hotel de Ville was thrown open, and the head of a
gendarme appeared. For an instant it remained motionless as one of
the stone decorations of the building, then after a long sigh of
disappointment the head disappeared. The brigadier, calm and
dignified as the law he represented, passed through the crowd,
without answering the thousand questions addressed to him, and
re-entered the hotel.
"Well?" asked the two gendarmes.
"Well, my boys," said the brigadier, "the brigand must really
have escaped early this morning; but we will send to the
Villers-Coterets and Noyon roads, and search the forest, when we
shall catch him, no doubt." The honorable functionary had scarcely
expressed himself thus, in that intonation which is peculiar to
brigadiers of the gendarmerie, when a loud scream, accompanied by
the violent ringing of a bell, resounded through the court of the
hotel. "Ah, what is that?" cried the brigadier.",
    "hotel. "Ah, what is that?" cried the brigadier.
"Some traveller seems impatient," said the host. "What number
was it that rang?"
"Number 3."
"Run, waiter!" At this moment the screams and ringing were
redoubled. "Ah," said the brigadier, stopping the servant, "the
person who is ringing appears to want something more than a waiter;
we will attend upon him with a gendarme. Who occupies Number
3?"
"The little fellow who arrived last night in a post-chaise with
his sister, and who asked for an apartment with two beds." The bell
here rang for the third time, with another shriek of anguish.
"Follow me, Mr. Commissary!" said the brigadier; "tread in my
steps."
"Wait an instant," said the host; "Number 3 has two staircases,
— inside and outside."
"Good," said the brigadier. "I will take charge of the inside
one. Are the carbines loaded?"
"Yes, brigadier."
"Well, you guard the exterior, and if he attempts to fly, fire
upon him; he must be a great criminal, from what the telegraph
says."
The brigadier, followed by the commissary, disappeared by the
inside staircase, accompanied by the noise which his assertions
respecting Andrea had excited in the crowd. This is what had
happened. Andrea had very cleverly managed to descend two-thirds of
the chimney, but then his foot slipped, and notwithstanding his
endeavors, he came into the room with more speed and noise than he
intended. It would have signified little had the room been empty,
but unfortunately it was occupied. Two ladies, sleeping in one bed,
were awakened by the noise, and fixing their eyes upon the spot
whence the sound proceeded, they saw a man. One of these ladies,
the fair one, uttered those terrible shrieks which resounded
through the house, while the other, rushing to the bell-rope, rang
with all her strength. Andrea, as we can see, was surrounded by
misfortune.
"For pity's sake," he cried, pale and bewildered, without seeing
whom he was addressing, — "for pity's sake do not call assistance!
Save me! — I will not harm you."whom he was addressing, — "for pity's sake do not call assistance!
Save me! — I will not harm you."
"Andrea, the murderer!" cried one of the ladies.
"Eugenie! Mademoiselle Danglars!" exclaimed Andrea,
stupefied.
"Help, help!" cried Mademoiselle d'Armilly, taking the bell from
her companion's hand, and ringing it yet more violently. "Save me,
I am pursued!" said Andrea, clasping his hands. "For pity, for
mercy's sake do not deliver me up!"
"It is too late, they are coming," said Eugenie.
"Well, conceal me somewhere; you can say you were needlessly
alarmed; you can turn their suspicions and save my life!"
The two ladies, pressing closely to one another, and drawing the
bedclothes tightly around them, remained silent to this
supplicating voice, repugnance and fear taking possession of their
minds.
"Well, be it so," at length said Eugenie; "return by the same
road you came, and we will say nothing about you, unhappy
wretch."
"Here he is, here he is!" cried a voice from the landing; "here
he is! I see him!" The brigadier had put his eye to the keyhole,
and had discovered Andrea in a posture of entreaty. A violent blow
from the butt end of the musket burst open the lock, two more
forced out the bolts, and the broken door fell in. Andrea ran to
the other door, leading to the gallery, ready to rush out; but he
was stopped short, and he stood with his body a little thrown back,
pale, and with the useless knife in his clinched hand.
"Fly, then!" cried Mademoiselle d'Armilly, whose pity returned
as her fears diminished; "fly!"
"Or kill yourself!" said Eugenie (in a tone which a Vestal in
the amphitheatre would have used, when urging the victorious
gladiator to finish his vanquished adversary). Andrea shuddered,
and looked on the young girl with an expression which proved how
little he understood such ferocious honor. "Kill myself?" he cried,
throwing down his knife; "why should I do so?"
"Why, you said," answered Mademoiselle Danglars, "that you would
be condemned to die like the worst criminals."be condemned to die like the worst criminals."
"Bah," said Cavalcanti, crossing his arms, "one has
friends."
The brigadier advanced to him, sword in hand. "Come, come," said
Andrea, "sheathe your sword, my fine fellow; there is no occasion
to make such a fuss, since I give myself up;" and he held out his
hands to be manacled. The girls looked with horror upon this
shameful metamorphosis, the man of the world shaking off his
covering and appearing as a galley-slave. Andrea turned towards
them, and with an impertinent smile asked, — "Have you any message
for your father, Mademoiselle Danglars, for in all probability I
shall return to Paris?"
Eugenie covered her face with her hands. "Oh, ho!" said Andrea,
"you need not be ashamed, even though you did post after me. Was I
not nearly your husband?"
And with this raillery Andrea went out, leaving the two girls a
prey to their own feelings of shame, and to the comments of the
crowd. An hour after they stepped into their calash, both dressed
in feminine attire. The gate of the hotel had been closed to screen
them from sight, but they were forced, when the door was open, to
pass through a throng of curious glances and whispering voices.
Eugenie closed her eyes; but though she could not see, she could
hear, and the sneers of the crowd reached her in the carriage. "Oh,
why is not the world a wilderness?" she exclaimed, throwing herself
into the arms of Mademoiselle d'Armilly, her eyes sparkling with
the same kind of rage which made Nero wish that the Roman world had
but one neck, that he might sever it at a single blow. The next day
they stopped at the Hotel de Flandre, at Brussels. The same evening
Andrea was incarcerated in the Conciergerie.",
    "As the procureur had told Madame Danglars, Valentine was not yet
recovered. Bowed down with fatigue, she was indeed confined to her
bed; and it was in her own room, and from the lips of Madame de
Villefort, that she heard all the strange events we have related, —
we mean the flight of Eugenie and the arrest of Andrea Cavalcanti,
or rather Benedetto, together with the accusation of murder
pronounced against him. But Valentine was so weak that this recital
scarcely produced the same effect it would have done had she been
in her usual state of health. Indeed, her brain was only the seat
of vague ideas, and confused forms, mingled with strange fancies,
alone presented themselves before her eyes.
During the daytime Valentine's perceptions remained tolerably
clear, owing to the constant presence of M. Noirtier, who caused
himself to be carried to his granddaughter's room, and watched her
with his paternal tenderness; Villefort also, on his return from
the law courts, frequently passed an hour or two with his father
and child. At six o'clock Villefort retired to his study, at eight
M. d'Avrigny himself arrived, bringing the night draught prepared
for the young girl, and then M. Noirtier was carried away. A nurse
of the doctor's choice succeeded them, and never left till about
ten or eleven o'clock, when Valentine was asleep. As she went
down-stairs she gave the keys of Valentine's room to M. de
Villefort, so that no one could reach the sick-room excepting
through that of Madame de Villefort and little Edward.
Every morning Morrel called on Noirtier to receive news of
Valentine, and, extraordinary as it seemed, each day found him less
uneasy. Certainly, though Valentine still labored under dreadful
nervous excitement, she was better; and moreover, Monte Cristo had
told him when, half distracted, he had rushed to the count's house,
that if she were not dead in two hours she would be saved. Now four
days had elapsed, and Valentine still lived.
The nervous excitement of which we speak pursued Valentine evenThe nervous excitement of which we speak pursued Valentine even
in her sleep, or rather in that state of somnolence which succeeded
her waking hours; it was then, in the silence of night, in the dim
light shed from the alabaster lamp on the chimney-piece, that she
saw the shadows pass and repass which hover over the bed of
sickness, and fan the fever with their trembling wings. First she
fancied she saw her stepmother threatening her, then Morrel
stretched his arms towards her; sometimes mere strangers, like the
Count of Monte Cristo came to visit her; even the very furniture,
in these moments of delirium, seemed to move, and this state lasted
till about three o'clock in the morning, when a deep, heavy slumber
overcame the young girl, from which she did not awake till
daylight. On the evening of the day on which Valentine had learned
of the flight of Eugenie and the arrest of Benedetto, — Villefort
having retired as well as Noirtier and d'Avrigny, — her thoughts
wandered in a confused maze, alternately reviewing her own
situation and the events she had just heard.
Eleven o'clock had struck. The nurse, having placed the beverage
prepared by the doctor within reach of the patient, and locked the
door, was listening with terror to the comments of the servants in
the kitchen, and storing her memory with all the horrible stories
which had for some months past amused the occupants of the
ante-chambers in the house of the king's attorney. Meanwhile an
unexpected scene was passing in the room which had been so
carefully locked. Ten minutes had elapsed since the nurse had left;
Valentine, who for the last hour had been suffering from the fever
which returned nightly, incapable of controlling her ideas, was
forced to yield to the excitement which exhausted itself in
producing and reproducing a succession and recurrence of the same
fancies and images. The night-lamp threw out countless rays, each
resolving itself into some strange form to her disordered
imagination, when suddenly by its flickering light Valentineimagination, when suddenly by its flickering light Valentine
thought she saw the door of her library, which was in the recess by
the chimney-piece, open slowly, though she in vain listened for the
sound of the hinges on which it turned.
At any other time Valentine would have seized the silken
bell-pull and summoned assistance, but nothing astonished her in
her present situation. Her reason told her that all the visions she
beheld were but the children of her imagination, and the conviction
was strengthened by the fact that in the morning no traces remained
of the nocturnal phantoms, who disappeared with the coming of
daylight. From behind the door a human figure appeared, but the
girl was too familiar with such apparitions to be alarmed, and
therefore only stared, hoping to recognize Morrel. The figure
advanced towards the bed and appeared to listen with profound
attention. At this moment a ray of light glanced across the face of
the midnight visitor.
"It is not he," she murmured, and waited, in the assurance that
this was but a dream, for the man to disappear or assume some other
form. Still, she felt her pulse, and finding it throb violently she
remembered that the best method of dispelling such illusions was to
drink, for a draught of the beverage prepared by the doctor to
allay her fever seemed to cause a reaction of the brain, and for a
short time she suffered less. Valentine therefore reached her hand
towards the glass, but as soon as her trembling arm left the bed
the apparition advanced more quickly towards her, and approached
the young girl so closely that she fancied she heard his breath,
and felt the pressure of his hand.
This time the illusion, or rather the reality, surpassed
anything Valentine had before experienced; she began to believe
herself really alive and awake, and the belief that her reason was
this time not deceived made her shudder. The pressure she felt was
evidently intended to arrest her arm, and she slowly withdrew it.
Then the figure, from whom she could not detach her eyes, and who",
    "Then the figure, from whom she could not detach her eyes, and who
appeared more protecting than menacing, took the glass, and walking
towards the night-light held it up, as if to test its transparency.
This did not seem sufficient; the man, or rather the ghost — for he
trod so softly that no sound was heard — then poured out about a
spoonful into the glass, and drank it. Valentine witnessed this
scene with a sentiment of stupefaction. Every minute she had
expected that it would vanish and give place to another vision; but
the man, instead of dissolving like a shadow, again approached her,
and said in an agitated voice, "Now you may drink."
Valentine shuddered. It was the first time one of these visions
had ever addressed her in a living voice, and she was about to
utter an exclamation. The man placed his finger on her lips. "The
Count of Monte Cristo!" she murmured.
It was easy to see that no doubt now remained in the young
girl's mind as to the reality of the scene; her eyes started with
terror, her hands trembled, and she rapidly drew the bedclothes
closer to her. Still, the presence of Monte Cristo at such an hour,
his mysterious, fanciful, and extraordinary entrance into her room
through the wall, might well seem impossibilities to her shattered
reason. "Do not call any one — do not be alarmed," said the Count;
"do not let a shade of suspicion or uneasiness remain in your
breast; the man standing before you, Valentine (for this time it is
no ghost), is nothing more than the tenderest father and the most
respectful friend you could dream of."
Valentine could not reply; the voice which indicated the real
presence of a being in the room, alarmed her so much that she
feared to utter a syllable; still the expression of her eyes seemed
to inquire, "If your intentions are pure, why are you here?" The
count's marvellous sagacity understood all that was passing in the
young girl's mind.
"Listen to me," he said, "or, rather, look upon me; look at my
face, paler even than usual, and my eyes, red with weariness — forface, paler even than usual, and my eyes, red with weariness — for
four days I have not closed them, for I have been constantly
watching you, to protect and preserve you for Maximilian." The
blood mounted rapidly to the cheeks of Valentine, for the name just
announced by the count dispelled all the fear with which his
presence had inspired her. "Maximilian!" she exclaimed, and so
sweet did the sound appear to her, that she repeated it —
"Maximilian! — has he then owned all to you?"
"Everything. He told me your life was his, and I have promised
him that you shall live."
"You have promised him that I shall live?"
"Yes."
"But, sir, you spoke of vigilance and protection. Are you a
doctor?"
"Yes; the best you could have at the present time, believe
me."
"But you say you have watched?" said Valentine uneasily; "where
have you been? — I have not seen you." The count extended his hand
towards the library. "I was hidden behind that door," he said,
"which leads into the next house, which I have rented." Valentine
turned her eyes away, and, with an indignant expression of pride
and modest fear, exclaimed: "Sir, I think you have been guilty of
an unparalleled intrusion, and that what you call protection is
more like an insult."
"Valentine," he answered, "during my long watch over you, all I
have observed has been what people visited you, what nourishment
was prepared, and what beverage was served; then, when the latter
appeared dangerous to me, I entered, as I have now done, and
substituted, in the place of the poison, a healthful draught;
which, instead of producing the death intended, caused life to
circulate in your veins."
"Poison — death!" exclaimed Valentine, half believing herself
under the influence of some feverish hallucination; "what are you
saying, sir?"
"Hush, my child," said Monte Cristo, again placing his finger
upon her lips, "I did say poison and death. But drink some of
this;" and the count took a bottle from his pocket, containing a
red liquid, of which he poured a few drops into the glass. "Drinkred liquid, of which he poured a few drops into the glass. "Drink
this, and then take nothing more to-night." Valentine stretched out
her hand, but scarcely had she touched the glass when she drew back
in fear. Monte Cristo took the glass, drank half its contents, and
then presented it to Valentine, who smiled and swallowed the rest.
"Oh, yes," she exclaimed, "I recognize the flavor of my nocturnal
beverage which refreshed me so much, and seemed to ease my aching
brain. Thank you, sir, thank you!"
"This is how you have lived during the last four nights,
Valentine," said the count. "But, oh, how I passed that time! Oh,
the wretched hours I have endured — the torture to which I have
submitted when I saw the deadly poison poured into your glass, and
how I trembled lest you should drink it before I could find time to
throw it away!"
"Sir," said Valentine, at the height of her terror, "you say you
endured tortures when you saw the deadly poison poured into my
glass; but if you saw this, you must also have seen the person who
poured it?"
"Yes." Valentine raised herself in bed, and drew over her chest,
which appeared whiter than snow, the embroidered cambric, still
moist with the cold dews of delirium, to which were now added those
of terror. "You saw the person?" repeated the young girl. "Yes,"
repeated the count.
"What you tell me is horrible, sir. You wish to make me believe
something too dreadful. What? — attempt to murder me in my father's
house, in my room, on my bed of sickness? Oh, leave me, sir; you
are tempting me — you make me doubt the goodness of providence — it
is impossible, it cannot be!"
"Are you the first that this hand has stricken? Have you not
seen M. de Saint-Meran, Madame de Saint-Meran, Barrois, all fall?
would not M. Noirtier also have fallen a victim, had not the
treatment he has been pursuing for the last three years neutralized
the effects of the poison?"
"Oh, heaven," said Valentine; "is this the reason why grandpapa
has made me share all his beverages during the last month?""
  ],
  [
    "has made me share all his beverages during the last month?"
"And have they all tasted of a slightly bitter flavor, like that
of dried orange-peel?"
"Oh, yes, yes!"
"Then that explains all," said Monte Cristo. "Your grandfather
knows, then, that a poisoner lives here; perhaps he even suspects
the person. He has been fortifying you, his beloved child, against
the fatal effects of the poison, which has failed because your
system was already impregnated with it. But even this would have
availed little against a more deadly medium of death employed four
days ago, which is generally but too fatal."
"But who, then, is this assassin, this murderer?"
"Let me also ask you a question. Have you never seen any one
enter your room at night?"
"Oh, yes; I have frequently seen shadows pass close to me,
approach, and disappear; but I took them for visions raised by my
feverish imagination, and indeed when you entered I thought I was
under the influence of delirium."
"Then you do not know who it is that attempts your life?"
"No," said Valentine; "who could desire my death?"
"You shall know it now, then," said Monte Cristo, listening.
"How do you mean?" said Valentine, looking anxiously around.
"Because you are not feverish or delirious to-night, but
thoroughly awake; midnight is striking, which is the hour murderers
choose."
"Oh, heavens," exclaimed Valentine, wiping off the drops which
ran down her forehead. Midnight struck slowly and sadly; every hour
seemed to strike with leaden weight upon the heart of the poor
girl. "Valentine," said the count, "summon up all your courage;
still the beatings of your heart; do not let a sound escape you,
and feign to be asleep; then you will see." Valentine seized the
count's hand. "I think I hear a noise," she said; "leave me."
"Good-by, for the present," replied the count, walking upon
tiptoe towards the library door, and smiling with an expression so
sad and paternal that the young girl's heart was filled with
gratitude. Before closing the door he turned around once more, andgratitude. Before closing the door he turned around once more, and
said, "Not a movement — not a word; let them think you asleep, or
perhaps you may be killed before I have the power of helping you."
And with this fearful injunction the count disappeared through the
door, which noiselessly closed after him.Valentine was alone; two other clocks, slower than that of
Saint-Philippe du Roule, struck the hour of midnight from different
directions, and excepting the rumbling of a few carriages all was
silent. Then Valentine's attention was engrossed by the clock in
her room, which marked the seconds. She began counting them,
remarking that they were much slower than the beatings of her
heart; and still she doubted, — the inoffensive Valentine could not
imagine that any one should desire her death. Why should they? To
what end? What had she done to excite the malice of an enemy? There
was no fear of her falling asleep. One terrible idea pressed upon
her mind, — that some one existed in the world who had attempted to
assassinate her, and who was about to endeavor to do so again.
Supposing this person, wearied at the inefficacy of the poison,
should, as Monte Cristo intimated, have recourse to steel! — What
if the count should have no time to run to her rescue! — What if
her last moments were approaching, and she should never again see
Morrel! When this terrible chain of ideas presented itself,
Valentine was nearly persuaded to ring the bell, and call for help.
But through the door she fancied she saw the luminous eye of the
count — that eye which lived in her memory, and the recollection
overwhelmed her with so much shame that she asked herself whether
any amount of gratitude could ever repay his adventurous and
devoted friendship.
Twenty minutes, twenty tedious minutes, passed thus, then ten
more, and at last the clock struck the half-flour. Just then the
sound of finger-nails slightly grating against the door of the
library informed Valentine that the count was still watching, and
recommended her to do the same; at the same time, on the opposite
side, that is towards Edward's room, Valentine fancied that she
heard the creaking of the floor; she listened attentively, holding
her breath till she was nearly suffocated; the lock turned, and the
door slowly opened. Valentine had raised herself upon her elbow,door slowly opened. Valentine had raised herself upon her elbow,
and had scarcely time to throw herself down on the bed and shade
her eyes with her arm; then, trembling, agitated, and her heart
beating with indescribable terror, she awaited the event.
Some one approached the bed and drew back the curtains.
Valentine summoned every effort, and breathed with that regular
respiration which announces tranquil sleep. "Valentine!" said a low
voice. Still silent: Valentine had promised not to awake. Then
everything was still, excepting that Valentine heard the almost
noiseless sound of some liquid being poured into the glass she had
just emptied. Then she ventured to open her eyelids, and glance
over her extended arm. She saw a woman in a white dressing-gown
pouring a liquor from a phial into her glass. During this short
time Valentine must have held her breath, or moved in some slight
degree, for the woman, disturbed, stopped and leaned over the bed,
in order the better to ascertain whether Valentine slept — it was
Madame de Villefort.
On recognizing her step-mother, Valentine could not repress a
shudder, which caused a vibration in the bed. Madame de Villefort
instantly stepped back close to the wall, and there, shaded by the
bed-curtains, she silently and attentively watched the slightest
movement of Valentine. The latter recollected the terrible caution
of Monte Cristo; she fancied that the hand not holding the phial
clasped a long sharp knife. Then collecting all her remaining
strength, she forced herself to close her eyes; but this simple
operation upon the most delicate organs of our frame, generally so
easy to accomplish, became almost impossible at this moment, so
much did curiosity struggle to retain the eyelid open and learn the
truth. Madame de Villefort, however, reassured by the silence,
which was alone disturbed by the regular breathing of Valentine,
again extended her hand, and half hidden by the curtains succeeded
in emptying the contents of the phial into the glass. Then she",
    "in emptying the contents of the phial into the glass. Then she
retired so gently that Valentine did not know she had left the
room. She only witnessed the withdrawal of the arm — the fair round
arm of a woman but twenty-five years old, and who yet spread death
around her.
It is impossible to describe the sensations experienced by
Valentine during the minute and a half Madame de Villefort remained
in the room. The grating against the library-door aroused the young
girl from the stupor in which she was plunged, and which almost
amounted to insensibility. She raised her head with an effort. The
noiseless door again turned on its hinges, and the Count of Monte
Cristo reappeared. "Well," said he, "do you still doubt?"
"Oh," murmured the young girl.
"Have you seen?"
"Alas!"
"Did you recognize?" Valentine groaned. "Oh, yes;" she said, "I
saw, but I cannot believe!"
"Would you rather die, then, and cause Maximilian's death?"
"Oh," repeated the young girl, almost bewildered, "can I not
leave the house? — can I not escape?"
"Valentine, the hand which now threatens you will pursue you
everywhere; your servants will be seduced with gold, and death will
be offered to you disguised in every shape. You will find it in the
water you drink from the spring, in the fruit you pluck from the
tree."
"But did you not say that my kind grandfather's precaution had
neutralized the poison?"
"Yes, but not against a strong dose; the poison will be changed,
and the quantity increased." He took the glass and raised it to his
lips. "It is already done," he said; "brucine is no longer
employed, but a simple narcotic! I can recognize the flavor of the
alcohol in which it has been dissolved. If you had taken what
Madame de Villefort has poured into your glass, Valentine —
Valentine — you would have been doomed!"
"But," exclaimed the young girl, "why am I thus pursued?"
"Why? — are you so kind — so good — so unsuspicious of ill, that
you cannot understand, Valentine?"
"No, I have never injured her."you cannot understand, Valentine?"
"No, I have never injured her."
"But you are rich, Valentine; you have 200,000 livres a year,
and you prevent her son from enjoying these 200,000 livres."
"How so? The fortune is not her gift, but is inherited from my
relations."
"Certainly; and that is why M. and Madame de Saint-Meran have
died; that is why M. Noirtier was sentenced the day he made you his
heir; that is why you, in your turn, are to die — it is because
your father would inherit your property, and your brother, his only
son, succeed to his."
"Edward? Poor child! Are all these crimes committed on his
account?"
"Ah, then you at length understand?"
"Heaven grant that this may not be visited upon him!"
"Valentine, you are an angel!"
"But why is my grandfather allowed to live?"
"It was considered, that you dead, the fortune would naturally
revert to your brother, unless he were disinherited; and besides,
the crime appearing useless, it would be folly to commit it."
"And is it possible that this frightful combination of crimes
has been invented by a woman?"
"Do you recollect in the arbor of the Hotel des Postes, at
Perugia, seeing a man in a brown cloak, whom your stepmother was
questioning upon aqua tofana? Well, ever since then, the infernal
project has been ripening in her brain."
"Ah, then, indeed, sir," said the sweet girl, bathed in tears,
"I see that I am condemned to die!"
"No, Valentine, for I have foreseen all their plots; no, your
enemy is conquered since we know her, and you will live, Valentine
— live to be happy yourself, and to confer happiness upon a noble
heart; but to insure this you must rely on me."
"Command me, sir — what am I to do?"
"You must blindly take what I give you."
"Alas, were it only for my own sake, I should prefer to
die!"
"You must not confide in any one — not even in your father."
"My father is not engaged in this fearful plot, is he, sir?"
asked Valentine, clasping her hands.
"No; and yet your father, a man accustomed to judicialasked Valentine, clasping her hands.
"No; and yet your father, a man accustomed to judicial
accusations, ought to have known that all these deaths have not
happened naturally; it is he who should have watched over you — he
should have occupied my place — he should have emptied that glass —
he should have risen against the assassin. Spectre against
spectre!" he murmured in a low voice, as he concluded his
sentence.
"Sir," said Valentine, "I will do all I can to live. for there
are two beings whose existence depends upon mine — my grandfather
and Maximilian."
"I will watch over them as I have over you."
"Well, sir, do as you will with me;" and then she added, in a
low voice, "oh, heavens, what will befall me?"
"Whatever may happen, Valentine, do not be alarmed; though you
suffer; though you lose sight, hearing, consciousness, fear
nothing; though you should awake and be ignorant where you are,
still do not fear; even though you should find yourself in a
sepulchral vault or coffin. Reassure yourself, then, and say to
yourself: `At this moment, a friend, a father, who lives for my
happiness and that of Maximilian, watches over me!'"
"Alas, alas, what a fearful extremity!"
"Valentine, would you rather denounce your stepmother?"
"I would rather die a hundred times — oh, yes, die!"
"No, you will not die; but will you promise me, whatever
happens, that you will not complain, but hope?"
"I will think of Maximilian!"
"You are my own darling child, Valentine! I alone can save you,
and I will." Valentine in the extremity of her terror joined her
hands, — for she felt that the moment had arrived to ask for
courage, — and began to pray, and while uttering little more than
incoherent words, she forgot that her white shoulders had no other
covering than her long hair, and that the pulsations of her heart
could he seen through the lace of her nightdress. Monte Cristo
gently laid his hand on the young girl's arm, drew the velvet
coverlet close to her throat, and said with a paternal smile, — "Mycoverlet close to her throat, and said with a paternal smile, — "My
child, believe in my devotion to you as you believe in the goodness
of providence and the love of Maximilian."
Then he drew from his waistcoat-pocket the little emerald box,
raised the golden lid, and took from it a pastille about the size
of a pea, which he placed in her hand. She took it, and looked
attentively on the count; there was an expression on the face of
her intrepid protector which commanded her veneration. She
evidently interrogated him by her look. "Yes," said he. Valentine
carried the pastille to her mouth, and swallowed it. "And now, my
dear child, adieu for the present. I will try and gain a little
sleep, for you are saved."
"Go," said Valentine, "whatever happens, I promise you not to
fear."
Monte Cristo for some time kept his eyes fixed on the young
girl, who gradually fell asleep, yielding to the effects of the
narcotic the count had given her. Then he took the glass, emptied
three parts of the contents in the fireplace, that it might be
supposed Valentine had taken it, and replaced it on the table; then
he disappeared, after throwing a farewell glance on Valentine, who
slept with the confidence and innocence of an angel.",
    "The night-light continued to burn on the chimney-piece,
exhausting the last drops of oil which floated on the surface of
the water. The globe of the lamp appeared of a reddish hue, and the
flame, brightening before it expired, threw out the last
flickerings which in an inanimate object have been so often
compared with the convulsions of a human creature in its final
agonies. A dull and dismal light was shed over the bedclothes and
curtains surrounding the young girl. All noise in the streets had
ceased, and the silence was frightful. It was then that the door of
Edward's room opened, and a head we have before noticed appeared in
the glass opposite; it was Madame de Villefort, who came to witness
the effects of the drink she had prepared. She stopped in the
doorway, listened for a moment to the flickering of the lamp, the
only sound in that deserted room, and then advanced to the table to
see if Valentine's glass were empty. It was still about a quarter
full, as we before stated. Madame de Villefort emptied the contents
into the ashes, which she disturbed that they might the more
readily absorb the liquid; then she carefully rinsed the glass, and
wiping it with her handkerchief replaced it on the table.
If any one could have looked into the room just then he would
have noticed the hesitation with which Madame de Villefort
approached the bed and looked fixedly on Valentine. The dim light,
the profound silence, and the gloomy thoughts inspired by the hour,
and still more by her own conscience, all combined to produce a
sensation of fear; the poisoner was terrified at the contemplation
of her own work. At length she rallied, drew aside the curtain, and
leaning over the pillow gazed intently on Valentine. The young girl
no longer breathed, no breath issued through the half-closed teeth;
the white lips no longer quivered — the eyes were suffused with a
bluish vapor, and the long black lashes rested on a cheek white as
wax. Madame de Villefort gazed upon the face so expressive even inwax. Madame de Villefort gazed upon the face so expressive even in
its stillness; then she ventured to raise the coverlet and press
her hand upon the young girl's heart. It was cold and motionless.
She only felt the pulsation in her own fingers, and withdrew her
hand with a shudder. One arm was hanging out of the bed; from
shoulder to elbow it was moulded after the arms of Germain Pillon's
"Graces,"* but the fore-arm seemed to be slightly distorted by
convulsion, and the hand, so delicately formed, was resting with
stiff outstretched fingers on the framework of the bed. The nails,
too, were turning blue.
(* Germain Pillon was a famous French sculptor (1535-1598). His
best known work is "The Three Graces," now in the Louvre.)
Madame de Villefort had no longer any doubt; all was over — she
had consummated the last terrible work she had to accomplish. There
was no more to do in the room, so the poisoner retired stealthily,
as though fearing to hear the sound of her own footsteps; but as
she withdrew she still held aside the curtain, absorbed in the
irresistible attraction always exerted by the picture of death, so
long as it is merely mysterious and does not excite disgust. Just
then the lamp again flickered; the noise startled Madame de
Villefort, who shuddered and dropped the curtain. Immediately
afterwards the light expired, and the room was plunged in frightful
obscurity, while the clock at that minute struck half-past four.
Overpowered with agitation, the poisoner succeeded in groping her
way to the door, and reached her room in an agony of fear.
The darkness lasted two hours longer; then by degrees a cold
light crept through the Venetian blinds, until at length it
revealed the objects in the room. About this time the nurse's cough
was heard on the stairs and the woman entered the room with a cup
in her hand. To the tender eye of a father or a lover, the first
glance would have sufficed to reveal Valentine's condition; but to
this hireling, Valentine only appeared to sleep. "Good," shethis hireling, Valentine only appeared to sleep. "Good," she
exclaimed, approaching the table, "she has taken part of her
draught; the glass is three-quarters empty."
Then she went to the fireplace and lit the fire, and although
she had just left her bed, she could not resist the temptation
offered by Valentine's sleep, so she threw herself into an
arm-chair to snatch a little more rest. The clock striking eight
awoke her. Astonished at the prolonged slumber of the patient, and
frightened to see that the arm was still hanging out of the bed,
she advanced towards Valentine, and for the first time noticed the
white lips. She tried to replace the arm, but it moved with a
frightful rigidity which could not deceive a sick-nurse. She
screamed aloud; then running to the door exclaimed, — "Help,
help!"
"What is the matter?" asked M. d'Avrigny, at the foot of the
stairs, it being the hour he usually visited her.
"What is it?" asked Villefort, rushing from his room. "Doctor,
do you hear them call for help?"
"Yes, yes; let us hasten up; it was in Valentine's room." But
before the doctor and the father could reach the room, the servants
who were on the same floor had entered, and seeing Valentine pale
and motionless on her bed, they lifted up their hands towards
heaven and stood transfixed, as though struck by lightening. "Call
Madame de Villefort! — wake Madame de Villefort!" cried the
procureur from the door of his chamber, which apparently he
scarcely dared to leave. But instead of obeying him, the servants
stood watching M. d'Avrigny, who ran to Valentine, and raised her
in his arms. "What? — this one, too?" he exclaimed. "Oh, where will
be the end?" Villefort rushed into the room. "What are you saying,
doctor?" he exclaimed, raising his hands to heaven.
"I say that Valentine is dead!" replied d'Avrigny, in a voice
terrible in its solemn calm.
M. de Villefort staggered and buried his head in the bed. On the
exclamation of the doctor and the cry of the father, the servants",
    "exclamation of the doctor and the cry of the father, the servants
all fled with muttered imprecations; they were heard running down
the stairs and through the long passages, then there was a rush in
the court, afterwards all was still; they had, one and all,
deserted the accursed house. Just then, Madame de Villefort, in the
act of slipping on her dressing-gown, threw aside the drapery and
for a moment stood motionless, as though interrogating the
occupants of the room, while she endeavored to call up some
rebellious tears. On a sudden she stepped, or rather bounded, with
outstretched arms, towards the table. She saw d'Avrigny curiously
examining the glass, which she felt certain of having emptied
during the night. It was now a third full, just as it was when she
threw the contents into the ashes. The spectre of Valentine rising
before the poisoner would have alarmed her less. It was, indeed,
the same color as the draught she had poured into the glass, and
which Valentine had drank; it was indeed the poison, which could
not deceive M. d'Avrigny, which he now examined so closely; it was
doubtless a miracle from heaven, that, notwithstanding her
precautions, there should be some trace, some proof remaining to
reveal the crime. While Madame de Villefort remained rooted to the
spot like a statue of terror, and Villefort, with his head hidden
in the bedclothes, saw nothing around him, d'Avrigny approached the
window, that he might the better examine the contents of the glass,
and dipping the tip of his finger in, tasted it. "Ah," he
exclaimed, "it is no longer brucine that is used; let me see what
it is!"
Then he ran to one of the cupboards in Valentine's room, which
had been transformed into a medicine closet, and taking from its
silver case a small bottle of nitric acid, dropped a little of it
into the liquor, which immediately changed to a blood-red color.
"Ah," exclaimed d'Avrigny, in a voice in which the horror of a
judge unveiling the truth was mingled with the delight of a studentjudge unveiling the truth was mingled with the delight of a student
making a discovery. Madame de Villefort was overpowered, her eyes
first flashed and then swam, she staggered towards the door and
disappeared. Directly afterwards the distant sound of a heavy
weight falling on the ground was heard, but no one paid any
attention to it; the nurse was engaged in watching the chemical
analysis, and Villefort was still absorbed in grief. M. d'Avrigny
alone had followed Madame de Villefort with his eyes, and watched
her hurried retreat. He lifted up the drapery over the entrance to
Edward's room, and his eye reaching as far as Madame de Villefort's
apartment, he beheld her extended lifeless on the floor. "Go to the
assistance of Madame de Villefort," he said to the nurse. "Madame
de Villefort is ill."
"But Mademoiselle de Villefort" — stammered the nurse.
"Mademoiselle de Villefort no longer requires help," said
d'Avrigny, "since she is dead."
"Dead, — dead!" groaned forth Villefort, in a paroxysm of grief,
which was the more terrible from the novelty of the sensation in
the iron heart of that man.
"Dead!" repeated a third voice. "Who said Valentine was
dead?"
The two men turned round, and saw Morrel standing at the door,
pale and terror-stricken. This is what had happened. At the usual
time, Morrel had presented himself at the little door leading to
Noirtier's room. Contrary to custom, the door was open, and having
no occasion to ring he entered. He waited for a moment in the hall
and called for a servant to conduct him to M. Noirtier; but no one
answered, the servants having, as we know, deserted the house.
Morrel had no particular reason for uneasiness; Monte Cristo had
promised him that Valentine should live, and so far he had always
fulfilled his word. Every night the count had given him news, which
was the next morning confirmed by Noirtier. Still this
extraordinary silence appeared strange to him, and he called a
second and third time; still no answer. Then he determined to gosecond and third time; still no answer. Then he determined to go
up. Noirtier's room was opened, like all the rest. The first thing
he saw was the old man sitting in his arm-chair in his usual place,
but his eyes expressed alarm, which was confirmed by the pallor
which overspread his features.
"How are you, sir?" asked Morrel, with a sickness of heart.
"Well," answered the old man, by closing his eyes; but his
appearance manifested increasing uneasiness.
"You are thoughtful, sir," continued Morrel; "you want
something; shall I call one of the servants?"
"Yes," replied Noirtier.
Morrel pulled the bell, but though he nearly broke the cord no
one answered. He turned towards Noirtier; the pallor and anguish
expressed on his countenance momentarily increased.
"Oh," exclaimed Morrel, "why do they not come? Is any one ill in
the house?" The eyes of Noirtier seemed as though they would start
from their sockets. "What is the matter? You alarm me. Valentine?
Valentine?"
"Yes, yes," signed Noirtier. Maximilian tried to speak, but he
could articulate nothing; he staggered, and supported himself
against the wainscot. Then he pointed to the door.
"Yes, yes, yes!" continued the old man. Maximilian rushed up the
little staircase, while Noirtier's eyes seemed to say, — "Quicker,
quicker!"
In a minute the young man darted through several rooms, till at
length he reached Valentine's. There was no occasion to push the
door, it was wide open. A sob was the only sound he heard. He saw
as though in a mist, a black figure kneeling and buried in a
confused mass of white drapery. A terrible fear transfixed him. It
was then he heard a voice exclaim "Valentine is dead!" and another
voice which, like an echo repeated, — "Dead, — dead!"",
    "Villefort rose, half ashamed of being surprised in such a
paroxysm of grief. The terrible office he had held for twenty-five
years had succeeded in making him more or less than man. His
glance, at first wandering, fixed itself upon Morrel. "Who are you,
sir," he asked, "that forget that this is not the manner to enter a
house stricken with death? Go, sir, go!" But Morrel remained
motionless; he could not detach his eyes from that disordered bed,
and the pale corpse of the young girl who was lying on it. "Go! —
do you hear?" said Villefort, while d'Avrigny advanced to lead
Morrel out. Maximilian stared for a moment at the corpse, gazed all
around the room, then upon the two men; he opened his mouth to
speak, but finding it impossible to give utterance to the
innumerable ideas that occupied his brain, he went out, thrusting
his hands through his hair in such a manner that Villefort and
d'Avrigny, for a moment diverted from the engrossing topic,
exchanged glances, which seemed to say, — "He is mad!"
But in less than five minutes the staircase groaned beneath an
extraordinary weight. Morrel was seen carrying, with superhuman
strength, the arm-chair containing Noirtier up-stairs. When he
reached the landing he placed the arm-chair on the floor and
rapidly rolled it into Valentine's room. This could only have been
accomplished by means of unnatural strength supplied by powerful
excitement. But the most fearful spectacle was Noirtier being
pushed towards the bed, his face expressing all his meaning, and
his eyes supplying the want of every other faculty. That pale face
and flaming glance appeared to Villefort like a frightful
apparition. Each time he had been brought into contact with his
father, something terrible had happened. "See what they have done!"
cried Morrel, with one hand leaning on the back of the chair, and
the other extended towards Valentine. "See, my father, see!"
Villefort drew back and looked with astonishment on the young
man, who, almost a stranger to him, called Noirtier his father. Atman, who, almost a stranger to him, called Noirtier his father. At
this moment the whole soul of the old man seemed centred in his
eyes which became bloodshot; the veins of the throat swelled; his
cheeks and temples became purple, as though he was struck with
epilepsy; nothing was wanting to complete this but the utterance of
a cry. And the cry issued from his pores, if we may thus speak — a
cry frightful in its silence. D'Avrigny rushed towards the old man
and made him inhale a powerful restorative.
"Sir," cried Morrel, seizing the moist hand of the paralytic,
"they ask me who I am, and what right I have to be here. Oh, you
know it, tell them, tell them!" And the young man's voice was
choked by sobs. As for the old man, his chest heaved with his
panting respiration. One could have thought that he was undergoing
the agonies preceding death. At length, happier than the young man,
who sobbed without weeping, tears glistened in the eyes of
Noirtier. "Tell them," said Morrel in a hoarse voice, "tell them
that I am her betrothed. Tell them she was my beloved, my noble
girl, my only blessing in the world. Tell them — oh, tell them,
that corpse belongs to me!"
The young man overwhelmed by the weight of his anguish, fell
heavily on his knees before the bed, which his fingers grasped with
convulsive energy. D'Avrigny, unable to bear the sight of this
touching emotion, turned away; and Villefort, without seeking any
further explanation, and attracted towards him by the irresistible
magnetism which draws us towards those who have loved the people
for whom we mourn, extended his hand towards the young man. But
Morrel saw nothing; he had grasped the hand of Valentine, and
unable to weep vented his agony in groans as he bit the sheets. For
some time nothing was heard in that chamber but sobs, exclamations,
and prayers. At length Villefort, the most composed of all, spoke:
"Sir," said he to Maximilian, "you say you loved Valentine, that
you were betrothed to her. I knew nothing of this engagement, ofyou were betrothed to her. I knew nothing of this engagement, of
this love, yet I, her father, forgive you, for I see that your
grief is real and deep; and besides my own sorrow is too great for
anger to find a place in my heart. But you see that the angel whom
you hoped for has left this earth — she has nothing more to do with
the adoration of men. Take a last farewell, sir, of her sad
remains; take the hand you expected to possess once more within
your own, and then separate yourself from her forever. Valentine
now requires only the ministrations of the priest."
"You are mistaken, sir," exclaimed Morrel, raising himself on
one knee, his heart pierced by a more acute pang than any he had
yet felt — "you are mistaken; Valentine, dying as she has, not only
requires a priest, but an avenger. You, M. de Villefort, send for
the priest; I will be the avenger."
"What do you mean, sir?" asked Villefort, trembling at the new
idea inspired by the delirium of Morrel.
"I tell you, sir, that two persons exist in you; the father has
mourned sufficiently, now let the procureur fulfil his office."
The eyes of Noirtier glistened, and d'Avrigny approached.
"Gentlemen," said Morrel, reading all that passed through the
minds of the witnesses to the scene, "I know what I am saying, and
you know as well as I do what I am about to say — Valentine has
been assassinated!" Villefort hung his head, d'Avrigny approached
nearer, and Noirtier said "Yes" with his eyes. "Now, sir,"
continued Morrel, "in these days no one can disappear by violent
means without some inquiries being made as to the cause of her
disappearance, even were she not a young, beautiful, and adorable
creature like Valentine. Mr. Procureur," said Morrel with
increasing vehemence, "no mercy is allowed; I denounce the crime;
it is your place to seek the assassin." The young man's implacable
eyes interrogated Villefort, who, on his side, glanced from
Noirtier to d'Avrigny. But instead of finding sympathy in the eyes
of the doctor and his father, he only saw an expression as",
    ...
    "Peppino; "You have paid two louis in advance."
"What? One hundred thousand francs for a loaf?"
"One hundred thousand francs," repeated Peppino.
"But you only asked 100,000 francs for a fowl!"
"We have a fixed price for all our provisions. It signifies
nothing whether you eat much or little — whether you have ten
dishes or one — it is always the same price."
"What, still keeping up this silly jest? My dear fellow, it is
perfectly ridiculous — stupid! You had better tell me at once that
you intend starving me to death."
"Oh, dear, no, your excellency, unless you intend to commit
suicide. Pay and eat."
"And what am I to pay with, brute?" said Danglars, enraged. "Do
you suppose I carry 100,000 francs in my pocket?"
"Your excellency has 5,050,000 francs in your pocket; that will
be fifty fowls at 100,000 francs apiece, and half a fowl for the
50,000."
Danglars shuddered. The bandage fell from his eyes, and he
understood the joke, which he did not think quite so stupid as he
had done just before. "Come," he said, "if I pay you the 100,000
francs, will you be satisfied, and allow me to eat at my ease?"
"Certainly," said Peppino.
"But how can I pay them?"
"Oh, nothing easier; you have an account open with Messrs.
Thomson & French, Via dei Banchi, Rome; give me a draft for
4,998 louis on these gentlemen, and our banker shall take it."
Danglars thought it as well to comply with a good grace, so he took
the pen, ink, and paper Peppino offered him, wrote the draft, and
signed it. "Here," he said, "here is a draft at sight."
"And here is your fowl." Danglars sighed while he carved the
fowl; it appeared very thin for the price it had cost. As for
Peppino, he examined the paper attentively, put it into his pocket,
and continued eating his pease.It was about six o'clock in the evening; an opal-colored light,
through which an autumnal sun shed its golden rays, descended on
the blue ocean. The heat of the day had gradually decreased, and a
light breeze arose, seeming like the respiration of nature on
awakening from the burning siesta of the south. A delicious zephyr
played along the coasts of the Mediterranean, and wafted from shore
to shore the sweet perfume of plants, mingled with the fresh smell
of the sea.
A light yacht, chaste and elegant in its form, was gliding
amidst the first dews of night over the immense lake, extending
from Gibraltar to the Dardanelles, and from Tunis to Venice. The
vessel resembled a swan with its wings opened towards the wind,
gliding on the water. It advanced swiftly and gracefully, leaving
behind it a glittering stretch of foam. By degrees the sun
disappeared behind the western horizon; but as though to prove the
truth of the fanciful ideas in heathen mythology, its indiscreet
rays reappeared on the summit of every wave, as if the god of fire
had just sunk upon the bosom of Amphitrite, who in vain endeavored
to hide her lover beneath her azure mantle. The yacht moved rapidly
on, though there did not appear to be sufficient wind to ruffle the
curls on the head of a young girl. Standing on the prow was a tall
man, of a dark complexion, who saw with dilating eyes that they
were approaching a dark mass of land in the shape of a cone, which
rose from the midst of the waves like the hat of a Catalan. "Is
that Monte Cristo?" asked the traveller, to whose orders the yacht
was for the time submitted, in a melancholy voice.
"Yes, your excellency," said the captain, "we have reached
it."
"We have reached it!" repeated the traveller in an accent of
indescribable sadness. Then he added, in a low tone, "Yes; that is
the haven." And then he again plunged into a train of thought, the
character of which was better revealed by a sad smile, than it
would have been by tears. A few minutes afterwards a flash ofwould have been by tears. A few minutes afterwards a flash of
light, which was extinguished instantly, was seen on the land, and
the sound of firearms reached the yacht.
"Your excellency," said the captain, "that was the land signal,
will you answer yourself?"
"What signal?" The captain pointed towards the island, up the
side of which ascended a volume of smoke, increasing as it rose.
"Ah, yes," he said, as if awaking from a dream. "Give it to
me."
The captain gave him a loaded carbine; the traveller slowly
raised it, and fired in the air. Ten minutes afterwards, the sails
were furled, and they cast anchor about a hundred fathoms from the
little harbor. The gig was already lowered, and in it were four
oarsmen and a coxswain. The traveller descended, and instead of
sitting down at the stern of the boat, which had been decorated
with a blue carpet for his accommodation, stood up with his arms
crossed. The rowers waited, their oars half lifted out of the
water, like birds drying their wings.
"Give way," said the traveller. The eight oars fell into the sea
simultaneously without splashing a drop of water, and the boat,
yielding to the impulsion, glided forward. In an instant they found
themselves in a little harbor, formed in a natural creek; the boat
grounded on the fine sand.
"Will your excellency be so good as to mount the shoulders of
two of our men, they will carry you ashore?" The young man answered
this invitation with a gesture of indifference, and stepped out of
the boat; the sea immediately rose to his waist. "Ah, your
excellency," murmured the pilot, "you should not have done so; our
master will scold us for it." The young man continued to advance,
following the sailors, who chose a firm footing. Thirty strides
brought them to dry land; the young man stamped on the ground to
shake off the wet, and looked around for some one to show him his
road, for it was quite dark. Just as he turned, a hand rested on
his shoulder, and a voice which made him shudder exclaimed, —",
    "his shoulder, and a voice which made him shudder exclaimed, —
"Good-evening, Maximilian; you are punctual, thank you!"
"Ah, is it you, count?" said the young man, in an almost joyful
accent, pressing Monte Cristo's hand with both his own.
"Yes; you see I am as exact as you are. But you are dripping, my
dear fellow; you must change your clothes, as Calypso said to
Telemachus. Come, I have a habitation prepared for you in which you
will soon forget fatigue and cold." Monte Cristo perceived that the
young man had turned around; indeed, Morrel saw with surprise that
the men who had brought him had left without being paid, or
uttering a word. Already the sound of their oars might be heard as
they returned to the yacht.
"Oh, yes," said the count, "you are looking for the
sailors."
"Yes, I paid them nothing, and yet they are gone."
"Never mind that, Maximilian," said Monte Cristo, smiling. "I
have made an agreement with the navy, that the access to my island
shall be free of all charge. I have made a bargain." Morrel looked
at the count with surprise. "Count," he said, "you are not the same
here as in Paris."
"How so?"
"Here you laugh." The count's brow became clouded. "You are
right to recall me to myself, Maximilian," he said; "I was
delighted to see you again, and forgot for the moment that all
happiness is fleeting."
"Oh, no, no, count," cried Maximilian, seizing the count's
hands, "pray laugh; be happy, and prove to me, by your
indifference, that life is endurable to sufferers. Oh, how
charitable, kind, and good you are; you affect this gayety to
inspire me with courage."
"You are wrong, Morrel; I was really happy."
"Then you forget me, so much the better."
"How so?"
"Yes; for as the gladiator said to the emperor, when he entered
the arena, `He who is about to die salutes you.'"
"Then you are not consoled?" asked the count, surprised.
"Oh," exclaimed Morrel, with a glance full of bitter reproach,
"do you think it possible that I could be?"
"Listen," said the count. "Do you understand the meaning of my"Listen," said the count. "Do you understand the meaning of my
words? You cannot take me for a commonplace man, a mere rattle,
emitting a vague and senseless noise. When I ask you if you are
consoled, I speak to you as a man for whom the human heart has no
secrets. Well, Morrel, let us both examine the depths of your
heart. Do you still feel the same feverish impatience of grief
which made you start like a wounded lion? Have you still that
devouring thirst which can only be appeased in the grave? Are you
still actuated by the regret which drags the living to the pursuit
of death; or are you only suffering from the prostration of fatigue
and the weariness of hope deferred? Has the loss of memory rendered
it impossible for you to weep? Oh, my dear friend, if this be the
case, — if you can no longer weep, if your frozen heart be dead, if
you put all your trust in God, then, Maximilian, you are consoled —
do not complain."
"Count," said Morrel, in a firm and at the same time soft voice,
"listen to me, as to a man whose thoughts are raised to heaven,
though he remains on earth; I come to die in the arms of a friend.
Certainly, there are people whom I love. I love my sister Julie, —
I love her husband Emmanuel; but I require a strong mind to smile
on my last moments. My sister would be bathed in tears and
fainting; I could not bear to see her suffer. Emmanuel would tear
the weapon from my hand, and alarm the house with his cries. You,
count, who are more than mortal, will, I am sure, lead me to death
by a pleasant path, will you not?"
"My friend," said the count, "I have still one doubt, — are you
weak enough to pride yourself upon your sufferings?"
"No, indeed, — I am calm," said Morrel, giving his hand to the
count; "my pulse does not beat slower or faster than usual. No, I
feel that I have reached the goal, and I will go no farther. You
told me to wait and hope; do you know what you did, unfortunate
adviser? I waited a month, or rather I suffered for a month! I didadviser? I waited a month, or rather I suffered for a month! I did
hope (man is a poor wretched creature), I did hope. What I cannot
tell, — something wonderful, an absurdity, a miracle, — of what
nature he alone can tell who has mingled with our reason that folly
we call hope. Yes, I did wait — yes, I did hope, count, and during
this quarter of an hour we have been talking together, you have
unconsciously wounded, tortured my heart, for every word you have
uttered proved that there was no hope for me. Oh, count, I shall
sleep calmly, deliciously in the arms of death." Morrel uttered
these words with an energy which made the count shudder. "My
friend," continued Morrel, "you named the fifth of October as the
end of the period of waiting, — to-day is the fifth of October," he
took out his watch, "it is now nine o'clock, — I have yet three
hours to live."
"Be it so," said the count, "come." Morrel mechanically followed
the count, and they had entered the grotto before he perceived it.
He felt a carpet under his feet, a door opened, perfumes surrounded
him, and a brilliant light dazzled his eyes. Morrel hesitated to
advance; he dreaded the enervating effect of all that he saw. Monte
Cristo drew him in gently. "Why should we not spend the last three
hours remaining to us of life, like those ancient Romans, who when
condemned by Nero, their emperor and heir, sat down at a table
covered with flowers, and gently glided into death, amid the
perfume of heliotropes and roses?" Morrel smiled. "As you please,"
he said; "death is always death, — that is forgetfulness, repose,
exclusion from life, and therefore from grief." He sat down, and
Monte Cristo placed himself opposite to him. They were in the
marvellous dining-room before described, where the statues had
baskets on their heads always filled with fruits and flowers.
Morrel had looked carelessly around, and had probably noticed
nothing.
"Let us talk like men," he said, looking at the count.
"Go on!"
"Count," said Morrel, "you are the epitome of all human",
    ""Go on!"
"Count," said Morrel, "you are the epitome of all human
knowledge, and you seem like a being descended from a wiser and
more advanced world than ours."
"There is something true in what you say," said the count, with
that smile which made him so handsome; "I have descended from a
planet called grief."
"I believe all you tell me without questioning its meaning; for
instance, you told me to live, and I did live; you told me to hope,
and I almost did so. I am almost inclined to ask you, as though you
had experienced death, `is it painful to die?'"
Monte Cristo looked upon Morrel with indescribable tenderness.
"Yes," he said, "yes, doubtless it is painful, if you violently
break the outer covering which obstinately begs for life. If you
plunge a dagger into your flesh, if you insinuate a bullet into
your brain, which the least shock disorders, — then certainly, you
will suffer pain, and you will repent quitting a life for a repose
you have bought at so dear a price."
"Yes; I know that there is a secret of luxury and pain in death,
as well as in life; the only thing is to understand it."
"You have spoken truly, Maximilian; according to the care we
bestow upon it, death is either a friend who rocks us gently as a
nurse, or an enemy who violently drags the soul from the body. Some
day, when the world is much older, and when mankind will be masters
of all the destructive powers in nature, to serve for the general
good of humanity; when mankind, as you were just saying, have
discovered the secrets of death, then that death will become as
sweet and voluptuous as a slumber in the arms of your beloved."
"And if you wished to die, you would choose this death,
count?"
"Yes."
Morrel extended his hand. "Now I understand," he said, "why you
had me brought here to this desolate spot, in the midst of the
ocean, to this subterranean palace; it was because you loved me,
was it not, count? It was because you loved me well enough to give
me one of those sweet means of death of which we were speaking; ame one of those sweet means of death of which we were speaking; a
death without agony, a death which allows me to fade away while
pronouncing Valentine's name and pressing your hand."
"Yes, you have guessed rightly, Morrel," said the count, "that
is what I intended."
"Thanks; the idea that tomorrow I shall no longer suffer, is
sweet to my heart."
"Do you then regret nothing?"
"No," replied Morrel.
"Not even me?" asked the count with deep emotion. Morrel's clear
eye was for the moment clouded, then it shone with unusual lustre,
and a large tear rolled down his cheek.
"What," said the count, "do you still regret anything in the
world, and yet die?"
"Oh, I entreat you," exclaimed Morrel in a low voice, "do not
speak another word, count; do not prolong my punishment." The count
fancied that he was yielding, and this belief revived the horrible
doubt that had overwhelmed him at the Chateau d'If. "I am
endeavoring," he thought, "to make this man happy; I look upon this
restitution as a weight thrown into the scale to balance the evil I
have wrought. Now, supposing I am deceived, supposing this man has
not been unhappy enough to merit happiness. Alas, what would become
of me who can only atone for evil by doing good?" Then he said
aloud: "Listen, Morrel, I see your grief is great, but still you do
not like to risk your soul." Morrel smiled sadly. "Count," he said,
"I swear to you my soul is no longer my own."
"Maximilian, you know I have no relation in the world. I have
accustomed myself to regard you as my son: well, then, to save my
son, I will sacrifice my life, nay, even my fortune."
"What do you mean?"
"I mean, that you wish to quit life because you do not
understand all the enjoyments which are the fruits of a large
fortune. Morrel, I possess nearly a hundred millions and I give
them to you; with such a fortune you can attain every wish. Are you
ambitious? Every career is open to you. Overturn the world, change
its character, yield to mad ideas, be even criminal — but
live."its character, yield to mad ideas, be even criminal — but
live."
"Count, I have your word," said Morrel coldly; then taking out
his watch, he added, "It is half-past eleven."
"Morrel, can you intend it in my house, under my very eyes?"
"Then let me go," said Maximilian, "or I shall think you did not
love me for my own sake, but for yours;" and he arose.
"It is well," said Monte Cristo whose countenance brightened at
these words; "you wish — you are inflexible. Yes, as you said, you
are indeed wretched and a miracle alone can cure you. Sit down,
Morrel, and wait."
Morrel obeyed; the count arose, and unlocking a closet with a
key suspended from his gold chain, took from it a little silver
casket, beautifully carved and chased, the corners of which
represented four bending figures, similar to the Caryatides, the
forms of women, symbols of the angels aspiring to heaven. He placed
the casket on the table; then opening it took out a little golden
box, the top of which flew open when touched by a secret spring.
This box contained an unctuous substance partly solid, of which it
was impossible to discover the color, owing to the reflection of
the polished gold, sapphires, rubies, emeralds, which ornamented
the box. It was a mixed mass of blue, red, and gold. The count took
out a small quantity of this with a gilt spoon, and offered it to
Morrel, fixing a long steadfast glance upon him. It was then
observable that the substance was greenish.
"This is what you asked for," he said, "and what I promised to
give you."
"I thank you from the depths of my heart," said the young man,
taking the spoon from the hands of Monte Cristo. The count took
another spoon, and again dipped it into the golden box. "What are
you going to do, my friend?" asked Morrel, arresting his hand.
"Well, the fact is, Morrel, I was thinking that I too am weary
of life, and since an opportunity presents itself" —
"Stay!" said the young man. "You who love, and are beloved; you,
who have faith and hope, — oh, do not follow my example. In your",
    "who have faith and hope, — oh, do not follow my example. In your
case it would be a crime. Adieu, my noble and generous friend,
adieu; I will go and tell Valentine what you have done for me." And
slowly, though without any hesitation, only waiting to press the
count's hand fervently, he swallowed the mysterious substance
offered by Monte Cristo. Then they were both silent. Ali, mute and
attentive, brought the pipes and coffee, and disappeared. By
degrees, the light of the lamps gradually faded in the hands of the
marble statues which held them, and the perfumes appeared less
powerful to Morrel. Seated opposite to him, Monte Cristo watched
him in the shadow, and Morrel saw nothing but the bright eyes of
the count. An overpowering sadness took possession of the young
man, his hands relaxed their hold, the objects in the room
gradually lost their form and color, and his disturbed vision
seemed to perceive doors and curtains open in the walls.
"Friend," he cried, "I feel that I am dying; thanks!" He made a
last effort to extend his hand, but it fell powerless beside him.
Then it appeared to him that Monte Cristo smiled, not with the
strange and fearful expression which had sometimes revealed to him
the secrets of his heart, but with the benevolent kindness of a
father for a child. At the same time the count appeared to increase
in stature, his form, nearly double its usual height, stood out in
relief against the red tapestry, his black hair was thrown back,
and he stood in the attitude of an avenging angel. Morrel,
overpowered, turned around in the arm-chair; a delicious torpor
permeated every vein. A change of ideas presented themselves to his
brain, like a new design on the kaleidoscope. Enervated, prostrate,
and breathless, he became unconscious of outward objects; he seemed
to be entering that vague delirium preceding death. He wished once
again to press the count's hand, but his own was immovable. He
wished to articulate a last farewell, but his tongue lay motionlesswished to articulate a last farewell, but his tongue lay motionless
and heavy in his throat, like a stone at the mouth of a sepulchre.
Involuntarily his languid eyes closed, and still through his
eyelashes a well-known form seemed to move amid the obscurity with
which he thought himself enveloped.
The count had just opened a door. Immediately a brilliant light
from the next room, or rather from the palace adjoining, shone upon
the room in which he was gently gliding into his last sleep. Then
he saw a woman of marvellous beauty appear on the threshold of the
door separating the two rooms. Pale, and sweetly smiling, she
looked like an angel of mercy conjuring the angel of vengeance. "Is
it heaven that opens before me?" thought the dying man; "that angel
resembles the one I have lost." Monte Cristo pointed out Morrel to
the young woman, who advanced towards him with clasped hands and a
smile upon her lips.
"Valentine, Valentine!" he mentally ejaculated; but his lips
uttered no sound, and as though all his strength were centred in
that internal emotion, he sighed and closed his eyes. Valentine
rushed towards him; his lips again moved.
"He is calling you," said the count; "he to whom you have
confided your destiny — he from whom death would have separated
you, calls you to him. Happily, I vanquished death. Henceforth,
Valentine, you will never again be separated on earth, since he has
rushed into death to find you. Without me, you would both have
died. May God accept my atonement in the preservation of these two
existences!"
Valentine seized the count's hand, and in her irresistible
impulse of joy carried it to her lips.
"Oh, thank me again!" said the count; "tell me till you are
weary, that I have restored you to happiness; you do not know how
much I require this assurance."
"Oh, yes, yes, I thank you with all my heart," said Valentine;
"and if you doubt the sincerity of my gratitude, oh, then, ask
Haidee! ask my beloved sister Haidee, who ever since our departureHaidee! ask my beloved sister Haidee, who ever since our departure
from France, has caused me to wait patiently for this happy day,
while talking to me of you."
"You then love Haidee?" asked Monte Cristo with an emotion he in
vain endeavored to dissimulate.
"Oh, yes, with all my soul."
"Well, then, listen, Valentine," said the count; "I have a favor
to ask of you."
"Of me? Oh, am I happy enough for that?"
"Yes; you have called Haidee your sister, — let her become so
indeed, Valentine; render her all the gratitude you fancy that you
owe to me; protect her, for" (the count's voice was thick with
emotion) "henceforth she will be alone in the world."
"Alone in the world!" repeated a voice behind the count, "and
why?"
Monte Cristo turned around; Haidee was standing pale,
motionless, looking at the count with an expression of fearful
amazement.
"Because to-morrow, Haidee, you will be free; you will then
assume your proper position in society, for I will not allow my
destiny to overshadow yours. Daughter of a prince, I restore to you
the riches and name of your father."
Haidee became pale, and lifting her transparent hands to heaven,
exclaimed in a voice stifled with tears, "Then you leave me, my
lord?"
"Haidee, Haidee, you are young and beautiful; forget even my
name, and be happy."
"It is well," said Haidee; "your order shall be executed, my
lord; I will forget even your name, and be happy." And she stepped
back to retire.
"Oh, heavens," exclaimed Valentine, who was supporting the head
of Morrel on her shoulder, "do you not see how pale she is? Do you
not see how she suffers?"
Haidee answered with a heartrending expression, "Why should he
understand this, my sister? He is my master, and I am his slave; he
has the right to notice nothing."
The count shuddered at the tones of a voice which penetrated the
inmost recesses of his heart; his eyes met those of the young girl
and he could not bear their brilliancy. "Oh, heavens," exclaimed
Monte Cristo, "can my suspicions be correct? Haidee, would it",
    "Monte Cristo, "can my suspicions be correct? Haidee, would it
please you not to leave me?"
"I am young," gently replied Haidee; "I love the life you have
made so sweet to me, and I should be sorry to die."
"You mean, then, that if I leave you, Haidee" —
"I should die; yes, my lord."
"Do you then love me?"
"Oh, Valentine, he asks if I love him. Valentine, tell him if
you love Maximilian." The count felt his heart dilate and throb; he
opened his arms, and Haidee, uttering a cry, sprang into them. "Oh,
yes," she cried, "I do love you! I love you as one loves a father,
brother, husband! I love you as my life, for you are the best, the
noblest of created beings!"
"Let it be, then, as you wish, sweet angel; God has sustained me
in my struggle with my enemies, and has given me this reward; he
will not let me end my triumph in suffering; I wished to punish
myself, but he has pardoned me. Love me then, Haidee! Who knows?
perhaps your love will make me forget all that I do not wish to
remember."
"What do you mean, my lord?"
"I mean that one word from you has enlightened me more than
twenty years of slow experience; I have but you in the world,
Haidee; through you I again take hold on life, through you I shall
suffer, through you rejoice."
"Do you hear him, Valentine?" exclaimed Haidee; "he says that
through me he will suffer — through me, who would yield my life for
his." The count withdrew for a moment. "Have I discovered the
truth?" he said; "but whether it be for recompense or punishment, I
accept my fate. Come, Haidee, come!" and throwing his arm around
the young girl's waist, he pressed the hand of Valentine, and
disappeared.
An hour had nearly passed, during which Valentine, breathless
and motionless, watched steadfastly over Morrel. At length she felt
his heart beat, a faint breath played upon his lips, a slight
shudder, announcing the return of life, passed through the young
man's frame. At length his eyes opened, but they were at first
fixed and expressionless; then sight returned, and with it feelingfixed and expressionless; then sight returned, and with it feeling
and grief. "Oh," he cried, in an accent of despair, "the count has
deceived me; I am yet living;" and extending his hand towards the
table, he seized a knife.
"Dearest," exclaimed Valentine, with her adorable smile, "awake,
and look at me!" Morrel uttered a loud exclamation, and frantic,
doubtful, dazzled, as though by a celestial vision, he fell upon
his knees.
The next morning at daybreak, Valentine and Morrel were walking
arm-in-arm on the sea-shore, Valentine relating how Monte Cristo
had appeared in her room, explained everything, revealed the crime,
and, finally, how he had saved her life by enabling her to simulate
death. They had found the door of the grotto opened, and gone
forth; on the azure dome of heaven still glittered a few remaining
stars. Morrel soon perceived a man standing among the rocks,
apparently awaiting a sign from them to advance, and pointed him
out to Valentine. "Ah, it is Jacopo," she said, "the captain of the
yacht;" and she beckoned him towards them.
"Do you wish to speak to us?" asked Morrel.
"I have a letter to give you from the count."
"From the count!" murmured the two young people.
"Yes; read it." Morrel opened the letter, and read: —
"My Dear Maximilian, —
"There is a felucca for you at anchor. Jacopo will carry you to
Leghorn, where Monsieur Noirtier awaits his granddaughter, whom he
wishes to bless before you lead her to the altar. All that is in
this grotto, my friend, my house in the Champs Elysees, and my
chateau at Treport, are the marriage gifts bestowed by Edmond
Dantes upon the son of his old master, Morrel. Mademoiselle de
Villefort will share them with you; for I entreat her to give to
the poor the immense fortune reverting to her from her father, now
a madman, and her brother who died last September with his mother.
Tell the angel who will watch over your future destiny, Morrel, to
pray sometimes for a man, who like Satan thought himself for anpray sometimes for a man, who like Satan thought himself for an
instant equal to God, but who now acknowledges with Christian
humility that God alone possesses supreme power and infinite
wisdom. Perhaps those prayers may soften the remorse he feels in
his heart. As for you, Morrel, this is the secret of my conduct
towards you. There is neither happiness nor misery in the world;
there is only the comparison of one state with another, nothing
more. He who has felt the deepest grief is best able to experience
supreme happiness. We must have felt what it is to die, Morrel,
that we may appreciate the enjoyments of living.
"Live, then, and be happy, beloved children of my heart, and
never forget that until the day when God shall deign to reveal the
future to man, all human wisdom is summed up in these two words, —
`Wait and hope.' Your friend,
"Edmond Dantes, Count of Monte Cristo."
During the perusal of this letter, which informed Valentine for
the first time of the madness of her father and the death of her
brother, she became pale, a heavy sigh escaped from her bosom, and
tears, not the less painful because they were silent, ran down her
cheeks; her happiness cost her very dear. Morrel looked around
uneasily. "But," he said, "the count's generosity is too
overwhelming; Valentine will be satisfied with my humble fortune.
Where is the count, friend? Lead me to him." Jacopo pointed towards
the horizon. "What do you mean?" asked Valentine. "Where is the
count? — where is Haidee?"
"Look!" said Jacopo.
The eyes of both were fixed upon the spot indicated by the
sailor, and on the blue line separating the sky from the
Mediterranean Sea, they perceived a large white sail. "Gone," said
Morrel; "gone! — adieu, my friend — adieu, my father!"
"Gone," murmured Valentine; "adieu, my sweet Haidee — adieu, my
sister!"
"Who can say whether we shall ever see them again?" said Morrel
with tearful eyes.
"Darling," replied Valentine, "has not the count just told us
that all human wisdom is summed up in two words? — `Wait and
hope.'""
  ]
]